Pro-Drinking Messages and Message Environments for Young Adults: The Case of Alcohol Industry Advertising in African American, Latino, and Native American Communities Author(s): Maria Luisa Alaniz and Chris Wilkes Source: Journal of Public Health Policy, Vol. 19, No. 4 (1998), pp. 447-472 Published by: Palgrave Macmillan Journals Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3343076 Accessed: 19-04-2016 01:49 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Palgrave Macmillan Journals is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Public Health Policy
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

Pro-Drinking Messages and Message Environments for Young Adults: The Case of Alcohol
Industry Advertising in African American, Latino, and Native American Communities
MARIA LUISA ALANIZ and CHRIS WILKES
INTRODUCTION
j5a OR RPORATIONS target ethnic communities as consumers for liquor, beer, and cigarettes (i). The
g E { 2alcohol industry has become expert in using ethnic heroes, holidays, and cultural and historical artifacts to appeal to disenfranchised populations. The
ZQD0*se-9 industry creates campaigns that focus on ethnic pride and nationalism. Common beer advertisement themes include the Mexican flag, successful African American entertainers, and Native American chiefs and warriors. The advertising is especially effective since ethnic minorities, kept out of the legitimate spotlight of national attention, seldom see their culture represented in other arenas. For many ethnic minorities who may feel excluded from the American milieu, the message seems clear; the alcohol industry recognizes and welcomes those cultures that were, heretofore, rendered invisible in most other sectors of society.
Moreover, for marginalized segments of our population, it is difficult not to see these alcohol media entreaties as an invitation to participate in the "good life" of the greater society. Admission seems to be available for the purchase price of the product. The implication is that the products will assist almost anyone in making that critical transformation into a more beautiful, more socially desirable, and successful person-such as those shown in the advertisements. Corporations market alcohol products, especially premium brands, as part of the trappings of the already successful citizen and discerning host. The products, therefore, present a commodity bridge to the
447
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

448 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
good life, in anticipation of social affirmation. Absent imminent or future official acknowledgment, these products represent a way to assimilate into the mainstream.
Very little has been written on ethnic images in alcohol industry targeted advertising. The lack of attention is consistent with the relative lack of ethnic minority images being used in advertising overall. It has only been since the I970S that advertisers "discovered" the buying power of ethnic minorities. According to Wilson and Gutierrez (i), three factors contributed to the focus on ethnic minorities: (a) the civil rights movement of the I96os in which both Latinos and African Americans effectively used consumer boycotts to raise awareness of social issues, (b) Black and Spanish-speaking advertising agencies convinced advertisers that African Americans and Latinos respond more favorably and with greater loyalty to those products that courted them through advertisements in the publications and broadcast stations used by African Americans and Latinos, and (c) audience surveys showed that targeting was effective in reaching and delivering specific segments of the mass audience. During this period, advertisers became aware that race, like other diversity factors, e.g., gender, geography, family status, and age, was easy to target through constituency advertising appeals. The alcohol industry in particular developed highly visible campaigns in the late seventies and eighties.
During the critical juncture of ethnic upward mobility in the I960-I970s, and due in large part to civil and educational rights activism, a critical mass of African Americans and Latinos were hired in many corporate sectors, including the alcohol industry. Advertisers became aware that racial ethnic communities were becoming eager to demonstrate that they must now be actively courted. They were beginning to utilize their greater economic potency to go along with the newly earned social and political influence. What had been an era dominated by its attention to social justice and economic welfare, the I96o-I970s, gave way to one that was fueled more by increasing social and economic aspirations and expectations for mobility, the I98o-199os.
The social activism era foreshadowed the new thrust toward social mobility and presented a prime opportunity for corporations to appeal to a wider cultural base of constituents. Corporations found that their advertising dollars could go farther, longer, and deeper through a more direct infusion strategy into the organizations,
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 449
streets, and celebrations of ethnic minority communities. This strategy began to compete with the glitzy media campaigns being sold to them by Madison Avenue. Ethnic minority communities also received direct attention from the alcohol industry through the internal lobbying efforts of newly hired ethnic minority managers and executives who were, themselves, asking for more attention for their communities based on sales potential. Moreover, there were various instances of historically accepted discriminatory hiring practices that placed some companies at public odds with ethnic minority communities. Such prevailing practices were no longer socially tolerable, given new civil rights legislation, secured through hard fought battles for equal employment and affirmative action in the I96o-I970s. Whether in direct response to ethnic minority aspirations, civil rights constituent pressure, or through the generalized pressures of the market, the corporate marketing approach was, consequently, being configured for the I98o-I99os.
FOCUS ON YOUTH
Marketing campaigns appropriate systems of cultural symbols, reinvent them, package and sell them as commodities to the general populace and, especially, to ethnic minority consumers. In order to make sense of media campaigns, we must examine their messages in terms of the audiences to which they are directed and from which they may also draw. Advertising is the way in which many modern marketing campaigns present their interpretation of cultures to the general society. Goldman (z), for example, argues:
The power of advertising lies in its ability to photographically capture and represent the meanings of social life. The power of
. ads lies in the skill with which (they) are able to appropriate and tap into the appearance of vitality and experience in everyday lifeworlds. The power to photographically frame and define is the power to turn our meanings and our experiences into stimulus whose meanings are made equivalent to corporate interests, and offered back to us joined to the commodity form. (z)
In the United States, the alcohol industry spends over $z billion annually on advertising and promotion. Their advertising campaigns, especially in ads targeting ethnic communities, link products with success, social acceptance, sexuality, friendship, youth, attractiveness,
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

450 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
and physical vigor (3). To the alcohol industry, young people represent the future and potential for greater consumption (4). Although there has been a recent reduction in overall alcohol advertising expenditures, the share that the industry is spending on promoting to specific segments of the market, rather than making a singular appeal to mass audiences, is growing. The focused marketing campaigns target high-risk ethnic and young adults, especially college-age populations (5).
The alcohol industry targets young adults even though statistics show that they are the most vulnerable to the irresponsible use of alcohol. Alcohol-related motor vehicle crashes are the number one public health problem among young people (6). A recent National Institute on Drug Abuse study of 50,000 students in more than 400 public and private secondary schools found that alcohol is the most popular drug among high school students. Nearly 8 i % reported that they had tried drinking alcohol at some point in their lives. Young adults are still in the process of shaping their identity and are highly impressionable. They want to fit in and are more likely to succumb to peer pressure in that effort. The preponderance of alcohol advertisements in print, billboards, and television represent alcohol through the use of glamorous and youthful images. These advertisements may lead young people to believe that alcohol consumption is a routine, normative, and appropriate part of everyday life (7). Although the research on the influence of advertising is not definitive, it is worth noting that there is sufficient evidence of at least a mild effect of beer and wine commercials on adolescent alcohol consumption, abuse and drunk driving (7).
Even before becoming a young adult, childhood exposure to alcohol may predispose youth to develop a more positive attitude towards alcohol, which eventually may present itself in adolescent drinking behavior (8). As exposure increases, young adults are slightly more likely to perceive that drinking is more widespread than it is. They are somewhat more likely to hold to the favorable stereotypes of the typical beer drinker as fun-loving, friendly, happy, manly, and young (7). Alcohol commercials use images that are attractive to young people, such as the popular Spuds McKenzie Budweiser mascot. Each year the typical young person encounters more than a thousand beer and wine commercials and fictional drinking incidents in comedies, dramas and movies. The omission of negative portrayals or the consequences
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 45I
of problem drinking may lead to the inference that drinking is relatively innocuous and risk free. Although it is difficult to make a clear causal link between exposure to alcohol advertisements and eventual consumption, clearly it is one of several influences than can predispose adolescents to feel positively toward drinking (8). Grube and Wallack (g) found that the more children have been exposed to beer commercials, and recall the brands advertised, the more likely they say they would drink as adults, and to hold positive beliefs about the social and ritual uses of beer. These findings have implications for ethnic minority children, who encounter alcohol advertisements daily not only through the media but also in their neighborhood environment.
ETHNIC MINORITY YOUTH
Austin and Meili (io) concluded that disadvantaged youth are at especially high risk for developing alcohol-related problems due to environmental factors in their local communities. Studies have shown that there is a disproportionate number of alcohol outlets in ethnic minority communities (II,I2,I3). An added effect of the high concentration of outlets is the proliferation of alcohol advertisements displayed on storefronts by merchants. One study found that on a walk from home to school, one-way, a student is exposed to io to 6i alcohol advertisements in a predominantly Latino community in northern California (i i). Also, billboards advertising alcohol and tobacco products are more prevalent in ethnic communities. Billboards are four times more prevalent in low-income, ethnic minority communities than other neighborhoods (I4). A survey of billboards in St. Louis found that there are twice as many billboards in African American neighborhoods. Approximately 6o% of these billboards advertised either alcohol or tobacco (3). A San Francisco-based study found that African American and Latino neighborhoods have more billboards advertising alcohol and tobacco than either White or Asian neighborhoods (I4). In a comparison of alcohol billboard advertisements in White vs. Black and Latino communities, there were thirteen in the White community vs. twenty-three in the Black community and thirty-one in the Latino community (I4). In the Latino community the majority of advertisements were for beer and wine, and the majority in the Black community were for malt liquor and distilled spirits.
Due to proliferation of outdoor advertising, ethnic young adults
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

452 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. 19, NO. 4
are bombarded with positive images of alcohol and alcohol-related behaviors from multiple sources in their community on a daily basis. The message is one of cultural acquiescence, tolerance, and even encouragement of alcohol consumption. All children and young adults view alcohol commercials on television, but the volume of alcohol advertisements in ethnic communities ensures constant exposure due to the dense network of alcohol outlets and billboards. Members of ethnic minority groups are more vulnerable to the slick advertising framed to promote the "good life." Due to historical, social, economic and political conditions, they may not hope to attain the American Dream, but advertisers invite them to grasp that small part of the lifestyle to which they have access.
The alcohol industry is targeting African Americans and Latin Americans due to the relatively young age, high growth rate (especially among Latinos), and anticipation of the future increase in purchasing power. In addition, the high levels of ethnic segregation, especially in the urban inner-cities, make these geographically isolated areas ideal for concentrated targeted advertising and promotion of alcohol. Moreover, the high density of alcohol outlets not only makes the product readily available but alcohol merchants readily display advertisements on their storefronts. These factors merge to create an environment where alcohol and alcohol advertisements become a part of a neighborhood culture. Exposure to alcohol advertising is not a choice for residents of these communities. Because of the salience of these environmental issues, this paper will focus primarily on community-level factors (i.e., outdoor advertising, sponsorship and promotion).
Due to the relatively small population, Native Americans are not targeted in the same manner as other ethnic minority groups. We include Native Americans, and specifically, an overview of the campaign to stop the use of the image of Crazy Horse, a Lakota warrior, by G. Heilman Brewing Co., because (a) the use of Crazy Horse exemplifies a pattern of disrespect for ethnic historical and cultural icons in alcohol advertising, (b) the historical similarity in the introduction of alcohol to this group, and (c) the high rate of alcohol-related health problems among this population. Moreover, this case study raises the issue of individual vs. commercial first-amendment rights.
In what follows we focus on: (a) the common historical pattern of introduction of alcohol to ethnic people in the Americas and present
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 453
day health problems, (b) the specific techniques and campaigns used by the alcohol industry as they struggle to gain control of the market in ethnic minority communites, and (c) the response of ethnic communities.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE AND PUBLIC HEALTH ISSUES
It is critical to consider the historical context of alcohol in ethnic minority communities. In each group alcohol was introduced as a form of social control. Alcohol played a role in forced labor, enslavement, and cultural annihilation. The legacy of alcohol among ethnic minority groups is also evident in a contemporary context. There are higher rates of alcohol-related health problems among ethnic minorities. In urban America we see an egregious environmental problem: a disproportionate number of alcohol outlets and the proliferation of targeted advertisements in ethnic communities. Studies have shown that high rates of alcohol availability are related to various forms of violence and alcohol-related problems, such as homicide and driving-under-the-influence fatalities (I 5).
African Americans
Originally torn from their homeland and forbidden to engage in their indigenous cultural practices, African Americans were enslaved and treated like property. Slave owners, very much aware of their precarious condition in holding human beings in bondage, feared retaliation and rebellion. In order to discourage discussion regarding rebellion or the formulation of plans to escape, slaves were provided with alcohol during the precious few leisure hours allotted them. They were encouraged to become intoxicated to decrease the probability of action against their captors and to help create the illusion of freedom and happiness. The statement by Jesse Jackson, "We cannot stagger to freedom" (i6), crystallizes what continues to be a sober relationship between issues of historical subjugation, alcohol use, and what can be considered genuine and substantial strides toward freedom in both a historical and contemporary sense.
The practice of targeting African Americans is particularly egregious because of the current socioeconomic status and health conditions in the African American community. African Americans have a higher total mortality, infant mortality, child poverty, and unemployment rate than the general population. African American men have a higher incidence of cirrhosis of the liver and cancer of the esophagus,
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

454 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
both linked to alcohol consumption. The alcohol industry seems to be taking full advantage of both of the vulnerable chords resounding in African American community: high aspirations for upward mobility at one end, and social despair and a general lack of economic vitality at the other.
Latinos
In terms of a historical perspective similar to African Americans, alcohol was introduced as a form of social control in the trajectory of European colonization and enslavement of the indigenous people of present day Mexico and Central and South America. Distilled alcohol was introduced by the Spaniards who invaded and conquered them in the early I500S. Although tequila and pulque are considered national Latino beverages, they were introduced by Europeans who learned the distillation process from the Moors. Before the European invasion, legitimate drinking was ceremonial. Drunkenness was a grave misdemeanor punishable by death. The colonization of the indigenous people into a slave labor force brought the use of alcohol "to buffer the effects of fatigue and the miserable working conditions" (I7). There is still much work to be done to stem the tide of the effect of generations of alcohol use, abuse, and morbidity in the Latino community.
Today Latino youth are assailed by alcohol industry advertisements that are facsimiles of their own ethnic images. Television, radio, print, billboards, concert and festival sponsorship all project a variety of Latino images engaging in or extolling alcohol consumption. However, Latino young adults are not faring well in U.S. society. The high school dropout rate is over 50%. The three leading causes of death among Latino young adults ages I 5-24 are all preventable and alcohol related: (a) accidents (mostly automobile), (b) homicide, and (c) suicide. The majority of Latino youth reside in urban areas where violence and crime is an everyday occurrence. The prevalence of alcohol availability in their communities and the overt encouragement to consume, presented by targeted promotions, exacerbates the multiple problems of Latino youth.
Native Americans
The pernicious use of the name of Crazy Horse is even more evident when one considers the social, political, economic, and historical con-
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 455
text of the Native American population in the U.S. With the arrival of Columbus, Native Americans were to experience the theft of their land and the attempt to devastate their culture, including elimination of their many languages and spiritual practices. In place of a communal lifestyle, where a reverence for nature was central to their existence, a culture of greed, individualism, and a disregard for nature brought them to near extinction. Alcohol has taken its physiological and spiritual toll in terms of direct alcohol mortality. In addition to deaths from alcoholism, alcohol psychoses, and cirrhosis of the liver, alcohol is thought to be a contributing factor in other high rates of death from causes such as suicide, homicide, and accidents (I8). The rate of alcoholism in Indian country is 634% greater than the overall U.S. rate. Other alcohol-related problems, and the percentage higher than the general U.S. population, are as follows: accidents 259%, homicides ioi%, and suicides 96% (i9). Also, the high rate of fetal alcohol syndrome is devastating to the Native American community since it is affecting Native American children and youth and, subsequently, future generations (I 8). There is great concern among Native Americans regarding their present condition. Paula Gunn Allen writes, "Of course, some, many of us, just give up. Many are alcoholics, many are addicts. Many abandon the children, the old ones. Many commit suicide. Many become violent, go insane ... Currently our struggles are on two fronts: physical survival and cultural survival" (zo).
TARGET: AFRICAN AMERICANS
African Americans, as a constituent bloc, are a powerful consumer force. They spend more than $zoo billion a year on goods and services and will probably spend twice that much by the year zooo, according to estimates based on U.S. Census Bureau data. The alcohol industry targets African American consumers through multiple marketing strategies. Some examples include product endorsements by popular entertainment artists (Billy Dee Williams, Ice Cube), co-optation of popular culture music genres (rap music), donations to highly visible leadership organizations (Black Congressional Caucus), advertisements in African American magazines (Essence, Ebony and Jet), sponsorship of traditional community cultural events (Junetenth celebrations), and advertising in African American communities (alcohol outlets and billboards). Millions of alcohol industry
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

456 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. 19, NO. 4
dollars permeate African American communities through advertising and promotion. The industry is becoming adept at making their products familiar through targeted cultural marketing strategies. They focus on messages designed to strike a chord (zi). Their intention is to set their campaigns in a cultural frame that is palatable though not necessarily consistent with authentic cultural traditions or values.
Malt liquor, in particular, is heavily advertised and promoted to African American young adults. Malt liquor brews typically contain between 4.5% and 6% alcohol compared to 3.4% tO 4% for regular beers. While the beer industry has seen declines, the U.S. beer market share of malt liquor went from 5.7% in I980 to 9.5% in I995. Malt liquor sells best in African American and other ethnic minority markets. Although malt liquor was only 3% of total beer sales in i989, up to 3 z% of its sales are in the African American communities (zz). According to Wolf (23), the "aggressive and sometimes questionable marketing practices designed to appeal to inner city African Americans and Hispanics have created the new market for malts." The Stroh's company increased its spending for malt liquor advertising by nearly z 5% (24). The ads for malt liquors tread on the seductiveness of danger as a marketing image. They aggressively imbue the products with an element of danger, further heightening their allure among young urban poor.
The African American community is a socially active community, and as a result, it responds when there seems to be a reckless disregard for social and public health issues in its communities. To that end, a highly visible struggle took place over the marketing of a potent malt liquor, PowerMaster, specifically designed to appeal to African American males. G. Heilman Brewing Co., the developer of PowerMaster, was met with resistance from the African American community. Statements such as "We know that power does not come from a can" and a comparison of the brewer to crack dealers on the street formed part of the campaign to stop the marketing of the malt liquor (25). In July I99I the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (BATF) ruled that the "PowerMaster" name violated federal rules that prohibit alcohol container labels or product advertising from touting the strength of the product (z6). Heilman, due to community activism and the BATF ruling, was forced to pull "PowerMaster" from the market (27).
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 457
Representing a relatively new genre of African American music in the U.S., rap artists have become popular images in malt liquor advertising. Rap music is regarded as a major form of cultural resistance and social protest for African American youths who are increasingly alienated and marginalized in cities suffering from decayed infrastructures, police oppression, and pervasive poverty (z8). Although many rap artists' lyrics advocate social responsibility and the betterment of the African American community, the type of rap music that has received the most notoriety is "gangsta" rap. "Gangsta" rap is misogynistic and graphically describes and advocates violence. "Gangsta" rap performers such as RUN-DMC and N.W.A. have made the image of the 40 oz. malt liquor bottle a popular symbol of masculinity (z8). The most prominent and controversial marketing debate revolves around the use of rap singers to promote St. Ides, a malt liquor with the highest alcohol content of any mass-produced beer (8.o% per volume). Recording artists such as Ice Cube and King Tee promote St. Ides by proposing the 40-ounce package as a single serving -"I grab me a 40 when I want to act a fool. . . " (z 3). Ice Cube has also appeared in posters for the product displaying a hand gesture with street gang symbolism. A particularly explicit advertisement featured Ice Cube asserting that St. Ides "Gets your girl in the mood quicker" and "Gets your Jimmy thicker." The images of violence, objectification of women, and a lack of concern regarding communal values are constantly bombarding young people in predominantly African American communities. These advertising campaigns are obviously targeting young African American males. Unfortunately, they serve to reinforce negative representations and stereotypes of African American males prevalent in mainstream media. Since young African Americans are distressed due to low socioeconomic conditions, they become eager to emulate the behavior of successful African American youth in the entertainment industry despite the negative images. This method of using young, popular rap entertainers is effective. For example, the Los Angeles distributor for St. Ides could not meet the demand for the malt liquor after the release of the movie "Boyz in the Hood," which prominently featured Ice Cube drinking from a St. Ides 40 oz. bottle (z9).
The number one cause of death for young African American males is homicide. The link between homicide and alcohol has been well established (30), yet the alcohol industry chooses to use advertise-
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

458 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
ments that glamorize violence. The following is a radio ad for St. Ides malt liquor:
Mmmmm, I need some refreshin' when I finish manifessin' Too cold to hold Bold like Smith and Wesson ... Ice Cube's in the house don't you know me Pour out on the curb for the homies.
According to a Newsweek article (3 I) the lyrics may sound innocuous, but the jingle has the subtlety of a "drive-by shooting." Broadcast on urban contemporary radio stations, the lyric is comparing a bottle of malt liquor to a Smith and Wesson handgun.
Targeting more affluent sectors of the African American community is also prevalent. The alcohol industry is tapping into African American advertising firms that will tailor a marketing strategy with an "insiders" cultural approach. Joel P. Martin, an African American advertising agency, developed Anheuser-Busch's King Cobra malt liquor advertising campaign using an African American actor and former football hero, Fred "The Hammer" Williamson (3z). Miller Brewing company uses the image of a professional African American male as a role model in ads. The ad reads "Mighty is the vision of those who strive with heart and determination" (33). A Remy Martin Cognac advertisement shows a well-groomed African American male with the tag line, "The man has it. The sense of Remy." In Ebony magazine a full-page ad reads "Do the right thing during African American History Month. Join the Miller Brewing Company in our salute to independent African American filmmakers." The ad features a drawing of Spike Lee.
Despite the increasing sales and overtures to African Americans, the alcohol industry and African Americans have experienced acrimony. Coors had to confront its negative image in the African American community, which was due not only to discriminatory hiring practices but racist comments made by its chairman in I984. The chairman claimed his comments were taken out of context (zi). However, the brewer agreed to contribute several hundred million dollars over five years to minority groups. Coors contributed to organizations such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the African American Shriners, Operation
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 459
PUSH, and the National Urban League. A result of these agreements is that the alcohol industry has purchased substantial exposure at events sponsored by these highly visible leadership organizations. The Black Congressional Caucus, amid internal and external controversy, regularly holds alcohol industry-sponsored events.
It is especially problematic when business, political, and civic leaders accept large contributions from the alcohol industry. According to Troy Duster, a sociologist at the University of California, Berkeley, alcohol sponsorship puts the group in a vulnerable position. He states that groups either become silent or speak on behalf of the benefactor (zi). In support of Duster's assessment, a report by the Center for Science in the Public Interest states that major African American magazines including Jet, African American Enterprise, and Modern African American Man have not published a single article or public service advertisement in recent years alerting African Americans to the risks associated with alcohol use and abuse (34).
Campaigns set up to attract young African American inner city youth, slick marketing strategies targeted at professionals, and sponsorship of prominent African American leadership organization events, all immerse African Americans in pro-drinking messages. According to Peter Bell, executive director of the Minnesota Institute on African American Chemical Abuse, "African Americans must begin to discuss what role, if any, alcohol advertising should play in their neighborhoods."
TARGET: LATINOS
One of the most highly visible campaigns in the late seventies and eighties was Coors' sponsorship of the "Decade of the Hispanic." As mentioned above with respect to African Americans, Coors' motivation was to improve its negative image due to much publicized accounts of discriminatory hiring practices. Coors eventually signed a controversial agreement with the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC). Many Latino leaders were critical of the agreement signed by LULAC because it tied its level of funding to the level of consumption in the Latino community. The marketing strategy has been quite a successful one for Coors. For instance, a June I990 Marketing and Media Decisions article, titled "COORS COOLS HISPANIA," stated that in I990 Coors is a "rising star" in the Hispanic community, doubling its share of beer sales to Hispanics to
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

460 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
io% over the previous six years. Latino communities are a lucrative market because they are a population with a large proportion of young adults and they are regionally contained, making them exceptionally well suited for developing early brand loyalty, focused targeting, and expansive constituency marketing.
The I990 census counted over zz million Latinos, a 53 percent increase since I980. Latinos are expected to become the nation's largest minority group by zoio, when their numbers are expected to reach 4I.3 million. Latinos are estimated to have a purchasing power of $z66 billion (3 5). Latinos between the ages of i8 and 24 have an
estimated purchasing power of $z6.3 billion. Due to the rapid
growth and relatively young age, advertisers are spending unprecedented amounts of their advertising budgets to reach the Latino population. In I997, advertisers spent $i.z billion to reach the Latino market (3 5). An advertising executive stated that "Hispanics are the hottest stock in the American consumer stock market. They are growing very fast, while many other market segments are declining in size and buying power" (36). Expenditures on Latino-specific advertising are increasing by 23 % each year.
Alcohol companies see the value of investing in Latino advertising. One of the top advertisers in the Latino community is AnheuserBusch Co. Their advertising expenditures targeted at the Latino market went from $I I .3 million in i996 to $I 2. 5 million in I997 (3 5). Anheuser-Busch Co. has a Latino role-models series that appears regularly in Hispanic magazines. Anheuser-Busch Co. founded and is one of the major funders of the National Hispanic Scholarship Fund. Anheuser-Busch Co. also sponsors conferences, community events, and leadership programs in the Latino community. They regularly sponsor Congressional Hispanic Caucus events. The investment has clearly paid off; they are the top selling beer among Latinos. Coors Latino marketing is currently split between special events and media. On the local level, Coors gets involved with the community by sponsoring softball leagues, dances, leadership banquets, and Latino music festivals. Their "Pura Vida" campaign won a Clio award in I988 for the best Hispanic campaign in any product category (37).
The mainstream media have not kept up with the issue of excessive or inappropriate alcohol advertising in the Latino community. This may be because a significant portion of the advertising takes place in the Spanish-language media. For example, although advertising of
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 46I
hard liquor is not allowed on English-speaking television, all Spanish language television stations regularly advertised hard liquor until I989. In I988, amid counter-marketing pressure from public health organizations, Telemundo Group, Inc., the smaller of two major Spanish-language networks in the United States, agreed to not air any more liquor commercials after the end of the year (38).
Aside from television commercials, print and billboard advertisements proliferate in Latino communities. Children are inundated with images of individuals who look culturally familiar and use a familiar cultural language to praise the use and effects of alcohol. Advertisements use a massive arsenal of symbols from the national iconography of Mexico, such as Mexican flags, national colors, cultural artifacts, architecture, pottery, furniture and maps of Mexico and Central America. There is a growing use in the media of words and phrases from the Spanish language. The use is more widespread in the southwest region and in urban areas with high Latino population density. Some companies sponsor concert tours that have mass appeal to young adults. For example, Bacardi Imports, Inc. sponsored the recent Gloria Estefan "Into the Light" national concert tour. According to the former U.S. Surgeon-General Antonia Novello and other Latino public health officials, the promotion of Bacardi "cooler" products is particularly problematic because youth have difficulty distinguishing soft drinks from cooler products. Gloria Estefan's role in the promotion is especially problematic since cooler products are the favored drink of young women. Gloria Estefan's role as a celebrity endorser of the U.S. Center for Substance Abuse Prevention's (CSAP), "Get Smart, Don't Start" I990 celebrity campaign, was seriously compromised by the acceptance of $I 8 million from Bacardi Imports, Inc. to promote their product. Subsequently, CSAP advised agencies to dispose of remaining Estefan campaign materials (39).
There is widespread alcohol sponsorship of annual celebrations to commemorate a symbolic historical event among Mexican Americans, Cinco de Mayo. Cinco de Mayo celebrates Mexico's victory over the French at the Battle of Puebla in i 86z. In Los Angeles and San Jose, California over 500,000 attend the event. In many communities the alcohol industry sponsors, advertises, and sells their beverages at Cinco de Mayo celebrations. The issue of alcohol sponsorship of Cinco de Mayo events has created controversy in Mexican American communities. The relationship between violence and alcohol
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

462 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
consumption at Cinco de Mayo festivals has also been noted by community groups and law enforcement officials. In an effort to curb fights and arrests due to intoxication, in Los Angeles alcohol sales were drastically restricted, with only two concessions being operated by the Cinco de Mayo festival organizers. Officers noticed a marked difference in the event, noting that the amount of "alcohol-induced violence" was reduced (40). A member of the Los Angeles City Council, Richard Alatorre, said that he would favor the banning of alcohol sales at the celebration (4I). There were incidents of alcoholrelated violence and numerous arrests at the I997 Cinco de Mayo celebration in San Jose, California. Latino community groups organized a campaign to advocate for an alcohol-free Cinco de Mayo, using the slogan "Our Culture is Not for Sale."
TARGET: NATIVE AMERICANS
They have stolen his name from us and slapped it on a bottle of beer ... we can never allow his name to be used like this ... we need to uphold our traditional right to protect the names of our ancestors, our traditions, customs and everything we hold sacred.
Seth Big Crow, descendant of Tasunke Witko, also known as Crazy Horse.
Crazy Horse was a warrior and revered spiritual leader who spoke out against the use and abuse of alcohol. As a chief in the I870S, he fought to keep the U.S. from invading the sacred birthplace of the Lakota people, the Black Hills, in their search for gold. In I876, he led the defeat of Lt. Col. George A. Custer at the Battle of the Little Bighorn in Montana. In order to save his people from subsequent retaliations in the form of brutal attacks on women and children and ultimate starvation, he surrendered to the U.S. troops. The most visible campaign against the use of Native American images involves the protest against the use of the name "Crazy Horse" for a malt liquor beverage by G. Heilman Brewing Co. and Hornell Brewing Co. G. Heilman is the same company that was involved in a legal battle with the federal govemment over the use of the name PowerMaster. The company is also the sponsor of the St. Ides malt liquor promotion using rap singer Ice Cube. It produces some of the most heavily consumed malt liquors; Colt 45 and Colt 45-Premium.
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 463
In March I992 Hornell Brewing Co. of Brooklyn, New York introduced "Crazy Horse" malt liquor as part of its celebration of the American West themes. "Crazy Horse" malt liquor is sold in 4o-ounce bottles and i 6-ounce cans, along with Plains beadwork and religious designs on the label. The Oglala Sioux Tribe along with other Native American and non-Native Americans were supported by Senator Daschle (D-SD) in opposing the use of the name. In April i992, U.S. Surgeon General Antonia Novello joined the protest. In July i992, Frank Wolf (R-VA) introduced an amendment to the U.S. House of Representatives to ban the use of a deceased individual of public prominence on a beer label. Congress members also urged the brewer to negotiate with the Oglala Sioux tribe. Talks between the tribe and the brewers were initiated. The talks were discontinued due to the perception that the brewers were not negotiating in good faith. Subsequently, the American Indian Movement (AIM) and Honor Our Neighbors Origins and Rights (HONOR), Inc., called for a nation-wide boycott of "Crazy Horse" malt liquor. The brewers have stated that they are honoring the memory of Crazy Horse with the product and that they are not targeting Native Americans (42). According to Michael Dorris, author of "The Broken Cord," a book about fetal alcohol syndrome, "Such honoring relegates Indians to the long ago and thus makes them magically disappear from public consciousness and conscience" (43).
In early October i992, federal legislation was signed, directing the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Bureau to deny approval of the "Crazy Horse" malt liquor label. The legislation passed as an amendment to a Treasury appropriations bill. The bill allowed the government to keep alcoholic beverage companies from using the names or likenesses of deceased people in a degrading or disparaging way. The names of living people are already protected by the law. The purpose of H.R. 5488 is "to prohibit the appropriation of funds for the purpose of approving a certificate of label approval which authorizes the use of the name Crazy Horse on any distilled spirit, wine, or malt beverage product." The Congressional ban was the result of much hard work and support of many people, including Michael Her Many Horses and Randy Plume of the Oglala Lakota Nation, and Gregg Bourland and V. True Clown of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, along with political leaders from South Dakota, Colorado, Minnesota, West Virginia, and Massachusetts.
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

464 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
Representative Johnson (D-SD) stated that the legislation would keep corporations from exploiting prominent people's names to undermine health promotion in minority communities (42). In a letter to California Representative Edward Roybal, then chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, Representative Johnson wrote, "As the congressman for the nine Indian reservations, I am concerned about the exploitation of historical symbols for the purpose of getting Native Americans to purchase alcohol." Senator Ben Nighthorse Cambell (R-CO), the only Native American serving in Congress, was a supporter of the amendment. Hornell brought suit against the government, charging that the prohibition was a violation of First Amendment free speech rights. A company spokesperson stated that the legislation "clearly is a matter of overkill and unquestionably an unconstitutional exercise" (42). In April I993, a federal court in Brooklyn, New York ruled that the federal law to ban use of the label was unconstitutional and a violation of Hornell's free speech rights. Senator Nighthorse Campbell (R-CO) stated that the judge's ruling validates the perception that Indians are "still mascots to too many people," adding "I'm sure if this was 'Broad's Beer' we were talking about, that judge would have ruled the other way" (44).
Before his death, due to fear of government reprisal, Crazy Horse had imposed a silence on his descendants regarding their lineage. On August 24, I993, Seth Big Crow, the court-appointed administrator of the Crazy Horse estate, filed summons and complaint in Rosebud Sioux Tribal Court. He stated that he feels a "silent outrage" about seeing the name of his ancestor on the label of a 40-ounce bottle of malt liquor (45). He proposes to take action to protect Crazy Horse from "association with a product such as alcohol which proved to have a devastating effect upon the lives and cultures of Indian people in general and of the Lakota in particular" (46). The civil court action seeks relief and damages from the brewers and bottlers of "Crazy Horse" malt liquor. The complaint is based on rights to property that include a "right to publicity" about the deceased. The defendants in the case are accused of violating the "right to publicity" by linking Crazy Horse with liquor. In addition, the complaint charges that the depiction on the label of a Native American in headdress violates the Indian Arts and Crafts Act's prohibition on falsely advertising that a product is Indian made (46).
Despite the federal court ruling, three states, Minnesota, Washing-
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 465
ton and Nebraska, have state-wide bans on the sale of "Crazy Horse" malt liquor (47). Clyde Bellecourt, founder and national director of the American Indian Movement (AIM) in Minneapolis, fought for the ban. He says "Crazy Horse" malt liquor is just as offensive as
"Pope John Paul Pilsner" or "Martin Luther King Dark Ale" (45).
The state of Washington Liquor Control Board found that the label was "false, misleading . . . undignified, obscene and in bad taste" (48). The Nebraska State Liquor Control Board found the product "derogatory and insulting. "Crazy Horse" malt liquor is still sold in approximately forty states. Native American groups and the estate of Crazy Horse have implored other states to follow suit. Due to the controversy, the beverage is not sold in South Dakota, the home of Crazy Horse and his descendants. Demonstrations to educate the public have been held by AIM and HONOR throughout the U.S.
CONCLUSION
Alcohol-related problems are associated with thousands of deaths each year and billions of dollars in societal costs. The attractive, often provocative use of ethnic images adopted by alcohol advertisers is having the desired effect of creating and expanding pro-drinking environments among ethnic young adults. These communities see their historical and cultural icons used to persuade them to use more alcohol products. The alcohol industry also provides substantial funding to community organizations and offers other public relations enticements in exchange for product sales. Historically, ethnic and racial groups have organized anti-alcohol movements (49,I8). It was clear to them that alcohol was used as a method of social control and subjugation. That struggle continues today. In frustration, ethnic communities are protesting the promotional pollution of their environment through counter-marketing strategies. In several cities residents have whitewashed alcohol and tobacco billboard advertisements. A Harlem resident on her way to church observed the whitewashing of alcohol and tobacco billboards by local activists. She encouraged "Whitewash them all! This smoking and drinking is killing our people. Why not advertise ... some message of hope of what young people can become?" (so). David Grant of the Institute on Black Chemical Abuse makes the connection between alcohol advertising and racism. He stated "The people who are being hit the hardest by the high octane beverages are the very market for which these products
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

466 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
are intended. Communities of color are disgusted with Heilman's (Powermaster malt liquor advertising) strategy. The same kind of racism is at work here that is at work in the society as a whole. It sees Black life and the lives of other people of color as intrinsically less valuable than the lives of European Americans" (z6). Communities of color see the disproportionate number of outlets and advertisements in their neighborhoods as a form of environmental racism. The major urban cities in the U.S. are characterized by a familiar pattern where there is a consistent overlap in the following major variables: raciallethnic segregation, poverty, and alcohol outlet/advertisement density.
Communities throughout the country are seeking solutions to alcohol-related problems. Many cities have banned alcohol billboards in residential areas (i.e., Baltimore, Chicago, Oakland, Los Angeles). Numerous cities throughout the country are following the lead of these cities. We have yet to see the full enforcement of these bans. The alcohol industry is quick to file law suits based on first-amendment rights. At issue here is the debate over individual vs. commercial freedom of speech. A I980 Supreme Court case established a four-part test for determining if a regulation could restrict commercial speech (5 i). The protection of the welfare of minors is at the center of their definition. Specifically, two areas relate to minors: (a) restrictions on advertising can reduce the demand for alcohol, and (b) the lack of choice in terms of exposure to outside alcohol advertisements. The legal test has not been applied to alcohol and tobacco billboard ordinances, therefore the long-term repercussions remain to be seen.
There are also efforts to decrease storefront alcohol advertisements. Some cities have ordinances that allow for only I5-25% of storefront space for advertising. These ordinances have the support of law enforcement officials since greater clear window space allows for better visibility of the interior of outlets. This strategy is important in ethnic communities where much of the advertising is posted on storefronts and may be at eye level with children walking home from school.
In Oakland, California an ordinance was passed that holds merchants responsible, with support from the city, for problems surrounding their establishment (i.e., loitering). The ordinance has the support of a multi-ethnic coalition of activists and city officials. An African-American city council member was a leader in the movement
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 467
to pass the legislation. The alcohol industry filed a law suit which delayed implementation for three years. The City of Oakland won and completed one year of implementation in December I997. An advisory council of merchants and community members meet monthly with city officials to monitor progress. The ordinance has also served to bring law enforcement, merchants, city officials and community members together to discuss alcohol-related problems on an ongoing basis.
Community groups are also calling for alcohol-free cultural celebrations and conferences. Native Americans were among the first to note the severe health problems among their population. Most pow-wows are now alcohol-free. Latinos have more recently initiated campaigns to advocate for an alcohol-free Cinco de Mayo. Alcohol-sponsored celebrations serve as promotions for alcohol rather than the commemoration of the historical or cultural significance of the event. Organizers must be aware that alcohol sponsorship and promotion provides a message that consumption is not only sanctioned but encouraged. For members of the audience, in many cases young adults, these events provide a potent pro-drinking message.
The remedies listed above have been initiated and implemented by grassroots community coalitions. It is evident that community groups are doing their part. Leaders and politicians must also take an active role. They must question their reliance on alcohol industry support. The funds provided by the industry serve to effectively silence those who are supposedly the "voice" of their constituent groups. These individuals have the authority and knowledge to raise questions regarding the broader issues related to sociodemographic patterns in ethnic communities. These issues need to be raised at city planning commission and city council meetings. It is the responsibility of these individuals to advocate and to hold governmental bodies accountable for the health and public safety of all those they represent.
It is also critical that alcohol research focus specifically on ethnic communities. It is clear that ethnic young adults experience alcohol-related problems to a greater degree than the general population, yet the research on this population is scant. There are no studies investigating the effect of targeted advertising on ethnic minority children. Are targeted advertisements more potent for children who are excluded from other realms of society? Do these children recognize the historical and cultural icons in the advertisements? Do the adver-
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

468 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
tisements influence them to develop positive expectancies regarding alcohol consumption similar to the general population? Studies have shown that higher rates of alcohol availability are positively related to alcohol-related problems. We need more research on how and why this relationship exists. Does this differ within or between ethnic communities? Research is needed to serve as a basis for alcohol policy formation specific to ethnic communities.
Overall, the burden of developing and thoroughly examining new approaches and remedies for the problems related to targeted alcohol advertising rests on not only community groups but also policy-makers, law enforcment, govermental agencies, alcohol industry, and alcohol researchers. Ethnic communities can be most effective when they receive the support of representatives from diverse sectors. The promotion of alcohol in ethnic minority communities was developed strictly by external sources for their own purposes regardless of the harmful effects. In particular, economic relationships between ethnic leaders and the alcohol industry raise serious questions regarding their role in promoting the welfare of the communities they represent. Generating and implementing solutions to the rampant alcoholrelated problems in ethnic minority communites is a universal social and moral responsibility.
REFERENCES
i. Wilson, C. C., II, and Gutierrez, F. Race, Multiculturalism and the
Media. Sage Publications, 1995. z. Goldman, R. Reading Ads Socially. London and New York: Routledge
Press, I993.
3. American Public Health Association Governing Council. "9213(PP): Advertising and Promotion of Alcohol and Tobacco Products to Youth [News]," American Journal of Public Health 83 (I993): 468-72.
4. Jacobson, M. F., Atkins, R., and Hacker, G. "Booze Merchants Cheer on Teenage Drinking," Business & Society Review 46 (I983): 46-50.
5. Hacker, G. A., and Stuart, L. A. Double Dip: The Simultaneous Decline of Alcohol Advertising and Alcohol Problems in the United States. Washington, DC: Center for Science in the Public Interest, I995.
6. Mosher, J. F. "Alcohol Advertising and Public Health: An Urgent Call for Action," American Journal of Public Health 84 (I994): i8o-8i.
7. Atkin, C. K. "Effects of Televised Alcohol Messages on Teenage Drinking Patterns," Journal of Adolescent Health Care II (I990): I0-24.
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES * PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 469
8. Lieberman, L. R., and Orlandi, M. A. "Alcohol Advertising and Adolescent Drinking. Special Focus: The Economics of Alcohol Abuse," Alcohol Health & Research World iz (I987): 30-3 3, 43.
9. Grube, J. W., and Wallack, L. "Television Beer Advertising and Drinking Knowledge, Beliefs, and Intentions among Schoolchildren," American Journal of Public Health 84 (I994): Z54-59.
iO. Austin, E. A., and Meili, H. K. "Effects of Interpretations of Televised Alcohol Portrayals on Children's Alcohol Beliefs," Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media (I994): 4I7-35.
ii. Alaniz, M. L., and Wilkes, C. "Reinterpreting Latino Culture in the Commodity Form: The Case of Alcohol Advertising in the Mexican American Community," Hispanic Journal of the Behavioral Sciences I7
(I995): 430-5I. iz. Scribner, R. A., MacKinnon, D. P., and Dwyer, J. H. "The Risk of
Assaultive Violence and Alcohol Availability in Los Angeles County," American Journal of Public Health 8 5 (I 99 5): 3 3 5-40. I3. Watts, R. K., and Rabow, J. "Alcohol Availability and Alcohol-Related Problems in 2I3 California Cities," Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 7 (i983): 47-58. I4. Altman, D. G., Schooler, C., and Basil, M. D. "Alcohol and Cigarette Advertising on Billboards," Health Education Research 6 (I99I):
487-90.
I 5. Parker, R. N., and Rebhun, L-A. Alcohol and Homicide: A Deadly Combination of Two American Traditions. Albany: State University of New York Press, I99 5.
i6. Herd, D. "We Cannot Stagger to Freedom: A History of Blacks and Alcohol in American Politics," in L. Brill, and C. Winick, eds. The Yearbook of Substance Use and Abuse. New York: Human Sciences Press,
I985.
I7. Rey, G. N. "Mexico," in D. B. Heath, ed. International Handbook on Alcohol and Culture. Connecticut: Greenwood Press, I99 5.
I8. Duran, E., and Duran, B. Native American Post Colonial Psychology. New York: State University of New York Press, I985.
I9. Indian Health Service. Regional Differences in Indian Health. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Legislation and the Division of Program Statistics, I993.
zo. Allen, P. G. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminism in American Indian Traditions. Boston: Beacon Press, I986.
zi. Novak, V. "Conservative and Corporations Plug into Black Power," Business and Society Review 7I (I989): 32-39.
zz. Mabry, M., and Adams, R. "A Long Way from 'Aunt Jemima': As Black
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

470 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. I9, NO. 4
Consumers' Spending Grows, Marketers Target Them with Hipper and More 'Authentic' Ads," Newsweek (i989, August I4): 34-35. 23. Wolf, A. E. "Malt Liquors Gain Popularity, Notoriety," Beverage World, iii Periscope Edition (i992, March 3I): 8. 24. Gupta, U. "Is Minority Advertising Falling Flat?," Advertising Age 55
(i984): M-24. 25. "Selling Sin to Blacks," Fortune (i99i, October): iOO. z6. Knaus, H. "The Return to PowerMaster," Multinational Monitor
(1i99, June): 6. 27. Themba, M. "The Rap on St. Ides: Reframing and Community Based
Activism," in D. Jernigan, and P. A. Wright, eds. Making News, Changing Policy. University Research Corporation and the Marin Institute,
I997.
z8. Herd, D. A. "Contesting Culture: Alcohol-Related Identity Movements in Contemporary African-American Communities," Contemporary Drug Problems 24 (I993): 739-58.
z9. Bernstein, M. "Boyz' Message Is Not About Drinking Beer," The Plain Dealer. Cleveland, Ohio, i99i. Quoted in Herd, D. "Contesting Culture: Alcohol-Related Identity Movements in Contemporary AfricanAmerican Communities," Contemporary Drug Problems 24 (I993): 739-758.
30. Parker, R. N. "Bringing 'Booze' Back In: The Relationship between Alcohol and Homicide," Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
32 (I995): 3-38. 3I. Miller, A., Foote, D., and Stone, J. "Do Gang Ads Deserve a Rap?,"
Newsweek (i99i, October 2I): 55. 3 2. Cooper, A. "Positively Upbeat: Joel P. Martin Plans to Plunge Her Small
Black-Owned Agency into the Mainstream," Advertising Age 57 (i986):
40-4I.
33. Joseph, W. F. "Blacks' Ambitions Enter the Picture, " Advertising Age 56 (i985): z6.
34. Milloy, C. "Selling of Black History," The Washington Post (i99i, January zg): C3.
35. Zate, M. "Opening the Big Wallets," Hispanic Business (I997, December): 6o.
36. Suris, 0. "Companies Target Hispanic Market: More Ad Campaigns Geared toward Growing Minority Group," The Washington Post (i989, August I3).
37. "Coors Cools Hispania," Marketing & Media Decisions (June I990): 30. 38. Stevenson, R. W. "Policy Shift by Hispanic Broadcasters," The New
York Times (I988, September z): DI5. 39. California Latino Alcohol and Other Drug Coalition. Latino Alcohol
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

ALANIZ & WILKES - PRO-DRINKING MESSAGES 471
Policy and Advocacy Action in California: Building a Culturally Appropriate Knowledge Base for Latino Communities. Oakland, CA, I994. 40. Wride N., and Legon, J. "L.A. Fiesta Broadway Draws 500,000 People: Kickoff of Week of Events was the Largest Cultural Block Party Downtown since I986," The Los Angeles Times (I990, April 30): Ai, AIS. 4I. Reich K., and Boyer, E. J. "The Show Must Go On, Fiesta Officials Say,"
The Los Angeles Times (I994, May 3): Bi, B8. 4z. Fink, S. "Congress Considers Law Banning Use of Famous People in
Response to Crazy Horse Malt Liquor," News From Indian Country (I99z, July). 43. Dorris M. "'Crazy Horse' Isn't a Good Name for a Malt Liquor," Star Tribune (i99z, April 24). 44. Gunn, E. "Judge Rules in Favor of Crazy Horse Name," The Milwaukee Journal (I993, April I4). 45. Associated Press. "Indian Leaders Pleased with Carlson's Ban on Sale of Crazy Horse Malt Liquor," Star Tribune (I994, May Ii): p. IB. 46. Reynolds, J. "Silence Ends and Descendents Just Say No! to Crazy Horse Brew," Indian Country Today (I993, September i): A6. 47. "Minnesota Joins Ban on Crazy Horse Label," San Jose Mercury News (I995, December 4): i6A. 48. Gough, R. P. "Lawyer Says Battle to Save Integrity of Crazy Horse Name is far from Over [Letter to the editor]," Indian Country Today (I994, March 25). 49. Herd, D. A Review of Drinking Patterns and Alcohol Problems among U.S. Blacks. (DHHS Report). Washington, DC: Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Black & Minority Health, I986. 5o. Goodstein, L. "N.Y. Crusader Takes Swipe at Billboards: Minister Targets Ads for Liquor, Cigarettes," The Washington Post (I990, March
ii): A3.
SI. Marin Institute. Can They Ban These Billboards? (I997, Winter): 5.
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

472 JOURNAL OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY * VOL. 19, NO. 4
ABSTRACT This paper examines targeted alcohol advertising in three ethnic communities: African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans in the U.S. We focus on the appropriation of cultural systems and the reinvention of them as commodities to consumers. We outline the specific strategies used in each ethnic community. For African Americans, there is an emphasis on selling malt liquor to young adults through the use of "power" and gang-related images. For Latinos, there is an appropriation of historical and cultural symbols such as the national flags and maps of Mexico and Central America. Native Americans have coalesced to keep the image of a chief and warrior, Crazy Horse, from being used to market malt liquor. Each of the ethnic groups is engaged in action to prevent alcohol-related problems in their communities. Generating and implementing solutions is a universal social responsibility.
This content downloaded from 128.6.218.115 on Tue, 19 Apr 2016 01:49:05 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

