NEWS FOCUS

an ever-increasing number of suceessful competing grant applieations." Lenfant vy^rote. At the same time, he noted that the average grant has gotten bigger.
At the $3.74 billion NCI--the largest member of the NIH f;imily--Klausner notes that the cost of grants has risen faster than the institute's budget in reeent years, steadily eating into the pool of money available for new projects. The amount of inoney for new initiatives is shrinking fast, from S262 million in 20()0 to $176 million this year, with a continued drop tbrecast for 2002, "Next year will be the most difficult by far," predicts Klausner.
In response, NCT is capping the increases that can be requested by investigators seeking renewal of their 3- and 4-year awards and ordering a special review tor grants larger than $500,000 a year, a category that's growing rapidly. By 2003. however, KJausner predicts that enough existing grants will have expired to ease the transition to slower growth rates.
Although the report of the special postdoubling committee isn't due until fall, the agency's 2002 budget request offers some clues about the strategies it might recommend for spending future budget inereases wisely. One is to continue investing heavily in infrastructure. For instance. NIH officials are touting plans to spend tens of millions of dollars over the next few years on high-end equipment--specialized electron microscopes, supercomputers, and other machines costing $500.000 or more. There is also talk of making a dent in an estimated $6 billion backlog in needed construction and renovation projects at universities and research hospitals. Both types of spending are attractive because, unlike grants, they can be paid for in a single budget year.
Last year, similar ideas led Representative David Obey (R-WI), the senior Democrat on tlie House panel that oversees NIH's budget, to ask whether such spending "really was the way the science is going, or a way to move larger sums of money now that you are getting these increases?" This year, however, there were virtually no such challenges at a House hearing on NIH's infrastructure proposals. And in the Senate, Tom Harkin (D-IA). the new head of the spending panel tkxX tiversees NIH's budget, encouraged officials to think about giving more cash to grantees who need bigger labs and better equipment.
Researchers are seconding that idea. Last week, for instance, an advisory group led by William Brody, president of Johns Hopkins University in Bahimore, Marylimd, recommended that NIH boost eonstruction and renovation grants to $ I billion a year--^from $75 million this year. But Kirsehstein deferred the idea until December
Another issue likely to be aired in committee discussions is the impact of "modular" grants. Under the streamlining policy, a

legacy of former director Harold Varmus and implemented in earnest last year, all grants of $250.000 or less have been awarded in increments of $25,000. The idea was to reduce the amount of paperwork for smaller grants. But it has had the unintended side effect of boosting overall spending: Lured by the laek of paperwork, more investigators appear to be requesting nmding levels closer to the ceiling, and renewal grant amounts are routinely rounded up.
bi his letter, for instanee, Lenfant noted that his institute limits renewal grants to a 10% increase, so a $100,000 grantee ean ask for up to $110.000 the second time around. Under the modular grant appRiach, however, the grant is rounded up to $125,000. The development is "one noteworthy cause" of rising grant costs, Lenfant wrote.
Klausner would also like to see peer re-

viewers take a closer look at the costs of proposed research. The thousands of seientists who review proposals to NIH are currently instructed to focus on scientific merit, and Klausner says that most study sections routinely recommend funding levels very near the investigators request. But those budgets are "often iar in excess of what we can realistically provide." says Klausner. The process of negotiating lower amounts has "become an enormous stress on program staff," he says.

Resolving these issues to everyone's satis-

faction, however, still won't solve NIH's bud-

get crunch. Observers say that only a miracle

will prevent stagnation and slumps after 2003

ill the number of grants, infrastructure spend-

ing, and clinical research. Doubling has "giv-

en everyone a little something to celebrate,"

notes one NIH oifieial. But the bill is rapidly

coming due.

-DAVID MALAKOFF

THE FUTURE OF NtH THE WINNERS
Even in a Time of Plenty, Some Do Better Than Others
"Fat cat" basic researchers, directors of large trials and surveys, and genomics Pooh-Bahs top the list of scientists vi/tth the most NIH funding

With a 25-person lab and eight grants irom er grants {see p. 1992). In this time of plenty,

the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH grant administrators early this year ex-

virologist Joseph Sodroski of the Dana- amined what they eall the "fat cats"--prinei-

Farijer Cancer histitute in Boston has a lot pal investigators (Pis) with six or more

going on, "There are people from all over grants--to make sure that NIH's 27 institutes

the world here," he says, "and keeping ev- and centers are not funding duplicative work

erybody fulfilled and happy is a ehal- and Pis aren't overextended. Extramural re-

lenge." And his research keeps sprouting in search chief Wendy Baldwin eoneluded that

new directions, from how HIV envelope "there was nothing to be concerned about"

glycoproteins help the virus enter cells, to tbr the 30 or so people on her list.

their cytopathology, to their possible role in

Science decided to take its own look at the

vaccines. Federal funding is the food that people at the top of the funding heap, examin-

nourishes those ideas, so

ing the total amount of

even though his plate is

money received and

full already, Sodroski

number of grants. Recip-

says, "if an idea comes

ients were divided into

along that looks fund-

three groups--those

able, I'll probably write a

who do mostly basic re-

grant [proposal],"

search, clinical and so-

That drive netted So-

cial science researchers,

droski $4 million in NIH

and genomics centers.

funding last year, putting

The leaders receive

liim in the upper echelons

$3 million or more a

of the agency's basic re-

year, eight times what

search grantees and at the

the average investigator

very top in terms of num-

receives. At tbe same

ber of grants. A leading AIDS researcher and

time, the portfolios of most of the top investi-

skilled proposal writer, So-

gators include grants

droski has benefited fi^om

shared with other labs.

an exploding NIH budget Purring. AIDS researcher Joseph So- Identifying the topihat has allowed the agen- droski made NIH's "fat cats" list of in- ftmded researchers from cy to award more and larg- vestigators with six or more grants. an NIH list of grants

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 292 15 JUNE 2001

1995

NEWS FOCUS

awarded in 2000 wasn't an easy task. (Baldwin calls NTH's grant data "a morass."} The totals for individual PTs are the sum ot" many variables--from their institution's indirect costs and salaries to whether the research involves cells or transgenic mice or primates, or relies on expensive equipment or subcontractors. The tables are also a snapshot for I year.

HPed Basic Re

Investigator 1. Staniey Prusiner 2. Alfred Gilman 3. Ronald Crystal 4- George
Stamatoyannopoulos 5. Seigo Izumo 5. Ian A. Wilson 6. Rainer Storb 7. Rtchard Boucher
9. Paui Greengard 10. Michaei Gimbrone

Institution UC San Francisco U. of Texas SW Med. Center Cornell University University of Washinglon

Lab staff 67 13 46 19

Harvard^etti ts. Deac. Med. Ctr. 25

Scripps Research Institute

16

Fred Hutchinson Cancer Res Ctr, 30

University of North Carolina

NA

Rocketeller University

40

Harvard/B&W's Hospilai

17

Main topic Pnon diseases Alliance tor Cell Signaling Gene therapy Blood disease gene therapy

NIH grants (SM) 12.5t6.6)9,8' 6.6 6,4'

Cardiovasc. functional genomics Structural genomics iniKative Bone marrow transplants Cystic tibrosis gene therapy Signal transduction Vascular endothelium

6.1' 5.6' 5.4 5,1 5.0 4,9

Those on these lists say the money brings plenty of headaches, including 18-hour days writing grant proposals

* Larger fiaure Includes a coniracl. lo develop a prton assay. ' Had signilicanlty lower tunciing in 1999.
Notes. Grariis tor several Pis indude some translallonal and dinteal raBearch. tncluaes all fiscal year 2000 awards, including mdirecl coats, except Iraining and conterenc grants. Some grants include forward yeaf funding. Excludes one PI witfi a structuraJ genomics initiative award but no ottiet NIH support. Lab staft includes aoniinislralive staft.

and setting aside time to prepare and host site visits from outside reviewers. Although most pine for more time in the lab, they say they're driven to seek more research funding by a surfeit of ideas, as weil as the trend toward big biology. Many also believe that outside collabomtions and big labs provide the best training for the next generation of investigators.
At the top of basic research money winners (above) is prion researcher Stanley Prusiner of the University of California, San Francisco {whose work involves costly biosafety facilities for mice). He's a Nobel Prize winner, as are two others in the top 10 (cell biologist Alfred Giltnan of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas and neurobiologist Paul Greengard of Rockefeller University in New York City). Other ranking investigators include pioneers

in their field, such as gene therapy researcher Ron Crystal, who ran the biggest lab at NTtI before moving to Wcill Medical College of Cornell University in New York City in 1993.
Greengard says he's ambivalent about the honor: "IVe thought for a long time that there is an ideal limit on lab size." But he says its hard to tum down the constant influx of talented young scientists interested in working with him and the "exciting ideas" that come along. As a result, his group now numbers some 40 people, up from about 30 a decade ago. "I'd much rather have a smaller lab, but I don't have the willpower" to say no, he confesses.
Other top-funded scientists don't necessarily maintain big labs. Instead, they owe their lofty rank to being a PI on a center grant, or more often progratii grants--called

POls--^that are equivalent to several ROl s split among various labs. They are attracted to these grants because they allow for interdisciplinary and collaborative science that can't be done on an ROl.
Michael Gimbrone of Harvard Medical School in Boston, who for 23 years has done pioneering work on atherosclerosis with a team ranging from engineers to molecular biologists, says that the combined brainpower on a grant tliat involves about five other labs creates "a SWAT team" for solving problems. Rainer Storb, head of transplantation biology at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, says he's been driven to grow lately by promising discoveries such as a new technique that allows bone marrow transplants to be used on tnorc patients. "Working as a group [of 125 basic and clini-

(Investigator-initiated grants, centers only)

Investigator 1. Donald Morton 2. J. Richard Udry 3. David Aiberis 4. Thomas Coates S. Fred. Appefbaum 6. Igor Grant
7. Kenneth Manton 8. Waller Willett 9, Robert Hobson
10, Carl Gnjnfeld

Institution

No, of Grants

John Wayne Cancer Institute 3

U. of North Carolina

1

U. of Arizona

2

UC San Francisco

3

Fred Hutchinson Cancer Res. Ctr. 1

UC San Diego

4

Duke University

5

Harvard University

3

U. of Med/Dent New Jersey

1

UC San Francisco

1

Main Topic Cancet vaccine, surgery trials Adoiesceni health survey Cancer prevention trials AIDS behavioral prevention Adult ieukemia research AIDS neurology, tissue bank Demographics of aging Diet and disease risk Vascular surgery thai HIV and metabolism

NIH Grants (SM) 11.9 8,4 6,3 5.8 5.7 5,2 5.1 5.1 5.1 4.7

NotBS: Grants are lot fiscal year 2000 and inctuds Indirect cosls. Grants include POls. ROIs. R24, R37. and P50s. Analysis did not include the toiinwlnq grani types; N,UO1.U10,L145, UC1. U19. C06, MOI. P30, P51, tmlning, and conference grants.

"I'm just euphoric that my scientific peers have given me the opportunity," says Donald Morton (left), a cancer researcher at the Jobn Wayne Cancer Institute in Santa Monica, California, who tops Science's list of the best funded clinical researchers. Morton manages $12 million worth of trials, including $7,8 million for a cancer vaccine that he's v^iorked on since the 1960s.
This ranking includes only invest gator-initiated clinical projects and centers. It leaves out some larger trials. Including AIDS drug trials, tbat are instigated by NIH, as well as cooperative cancer centers. Otber top-funded principal investigators (Pis) include bencb-to-bedside research on leukemia treatments by Frederick Appelbaum of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle and v^iork by psychologist Thomas Coates cf the University of California, San Francisco, on promoting bebaviors tbat prevent AIDS. Also on tbe list Is a teenage bealtb study, wbich PI Richard Udry of the University of Nortb Carolina, Chapel Hill, calls "one of the most expensive and complicated surveys ever done," Tbe results will provide social and biological data for countless researchers.

1996

15 JUNE 2001 VOL 292 SCIENCE vmw,sciencemag.org

NEWS F o c u s

cal people] has given us an enomiuus amount

of strength." Storb says. "Without that you

can't push this very complex field ahead at

the breathtaking pace we liave."

These researchers share a belief that big

Investigator

Institution

NiH grants ($M)

programs are a good way of doing science and training scientists. Gene therapy researcher Cieorge Stamatoyannopoulos of the University of Washington. Seattle, for example, has only 19 people in his lab. But his

1. Ello Lander 2. Robert Waterslan 3. Richard Gibbs 4, Gerald Rubin 5. Ronald Davis

Whitehead Institute Washington University Baylor Coliege of Medicine UC Berkeley Stanford tjniversity

65,3 44.6 23.8 14.1
9,4

!wo POls allow him to jump-start lhe careers of young researchers who don't have enough publications to compete on their

Noies; Includes all grants toi fiscal year 2000, Including indirect costs, except training and conlerence grants. Includes sequencing ot ttie genomes ot iiuman,
mouse, ant) ottier organisms.

own by essentially giving them their own

RO1. A few years after becoming part of the

program grant, he says, these young scien-

tists "are all extremely well ftinded "

The NIH grants for the major publicly funded genome se-

Others on the list head brand-new collab-

quencing labs are way off tbe charts, reflecting tbe biggest of big biology--and tbe race to

orations involving multiple institutions.

sequence tbe buman genome tbat ended last year. Topping this list of five is Eric lander's

They include Ian Wilson of the Scripps Re- Whitehead Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, wbich got a whopping $65 million in

^ search Institute in La Jolla, California, who

2000. (The sprint to tbe finish swelled his total, whicb stood at $13 million in 1995.) "Tbat

^ last year got a large gr^nt for a structural ge-

is truly production"--reagents and automated equipment, not so mucb people--says Jane

I nomics initiative, and Seigo Iziimo of Har-

Peterson, a grants administrator at tbe National Human Genome Research Institute, Lan-

I vard's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Cen-

der (above) says his bigh-votume operation is nevertbetess an exhilarating scientific en-

I ter, whose collaborative grant for cardiovas- deavor involving 20 senior researchers:"It bas tbe spirit of a fun 20-person lab,"

B uular functional genomics "is not something

Peterson says tbe "hallmarks" of these investigators are hiring "good lieutenants'' and

I a traditional lab can do," NIH officials see s these consortia as the wave of the future:

"an ability to manage a big production facility. It's not something you learn in graduate scbool." Althougb tbe human genome grants will vwind down wben finishing steps are

3 Gilman received $8.8 million last year for a completed in 2003, demand for sequencing other organisms and comparative genomics

i cell-signaling alliance shared among 20 in- will keep tbese labs busy (Science. 16 February, p. 1204).

 stitutions in what's called a "glue grant," the

9 first of manyft'omNIH.

I What does it take to get these large, I shared grants'.' A critical mass of talented inI vestigators and strong institutional support I are essential, researchers say, "You've also I got to set up some management structure," g Wilson says. In his lab, that means putting I Ph.D.s who would otherwise gravitate to I biotech companies in charge of areas such I as computing, x-rays, and cloning. * Not every researcher wants to Join collab% orations, however. Science fotmd that basic I Pis with many grants (below) tend to run E large, self-contained labs. The predilection for g multiple gnints. tliey say, stems in part from g hard times at NIH in the early 1990s. Tight S budgets oilcn led institutes to cut the si^c of a

grant sent tn for renewal, forcing invesligatore to apply for a second RO 1 to cover their eosts. Scripps virologist Michael Oldstone admits that the system was inefficient. "I'd rather have half as many grants and the same amount of money for research," he says.
But Pis who pile up the ROls have their reasons, "I think its a good thing that it's not one big hunk but tliat I competed for these grants six times," says human geneticist Aravinda Chakravarti of Jolms Hopkins University in Baltimore. And some don't see a need to limit the number of grants going to a single lab. Bigger labs "are the main source of training for the future." says Sodroski. "I'm not sure [funding] more investigators is bet-

ter." The rapid growth in NIH's budget has improved everyone's chances of getting money, he adds. '"So what's the big deal?"
Of eourse, those at the top say that not everybody wants or should try to be a rainmaker, "I think it's a ehoice. II would be a terrible thing if we say simply that having more money [means you are] more suceessful," says Chakravarti. Baldwin agrees that there are "lots of different ways to measure suceess," including the ability to sustain ftinding.
In thai arena, ihe apparent winner is Harold Seheraga. a protein eliemist at C'ornell. He s just sent off a renewal for an ROl he's had for 45 years--one that has provided data for more than 1000 papers. At the age

of 79, Seheraga, who has a

^ ^ ^ V Top-Funded Pis With Six or More G r a ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ l

20-person lab, brought in S717.000 last year from NIH

>estigator
Ronald Crystal Mary Jane Rotheram-Borus Kenneth Manton Xiping Xu Joseph Sodroski Aravinda Cliakravart Bruce Walker irving Weissman Daniel Ten en . Michael Oldstone

institution Cornell University UCLA

No ot Grants 6 6

Duke University Han/ard University
Dana-Farber Cancer Inst. Johns Hopkins University Harvard University Stanford University Harvard University Scripps Research Institute

6
e
8 6 6 8 7 7

Lab staff 46 *
* 30 25 30 34 40 19 15

Main Topic

NIH Grants (SM)

Gene therapy

6,6

AIDS education, inten/entlons

5,7

Demographics of aging

5.5'

Genetic, environmental epidemiology 4.2

HIV glycoproleins

4.1

Human disease genetics

3,7

Immune response to HIV

3,4

Hematopoietic stem cells

3,0

Blood development and leukemia 3.0

Vims immunobiology

3.0

for his university.
Seheraga has embraced many new ideas and technologies over his career. But he hasn't changed his mind about the value of being an independent investigator, in no small part beeause he can stay in closer contact with the work. "I have a wide range of

Dt appifcable for clinical anii social scierice researciiere, * Clinical lotals are lower Decause certain gtanls were excluded. tas: Analysis haseil on all fiscal year 2000 awards, tnciuding indirect costs. except N awards and grants for conferences, training, teaching, and smal) business.
Ipplements were not cotinted in grant numba' ) Science (oiind a total of 15 Pis wiiti sm or more grants using those crilGria, Lab staff includes admintslratlvo staff.

expertise in my lab," he says. And as for grant size, he says, "I jtjst ask for what I need,"

^^^ -JOCELYN KAISER

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 292 15 JUNE 2001

1997

Copyright of Science is the property of American Association for the Advancement of Science and its content may not be copied without the publisher's express written permission except for the print or download capabilities of the retrieval software used for access. This content is intended solely for the use of the individual user. Copyright of Science is the property of American Association for the Advancement of Science and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

