Identities
ISSN: 1070-289X (Print) 1547-3384 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gide20
GROWING UP ETHNIC IN TRANSNATIONAL WORLDS: IDENTITIES AMONG SECONDGENERATION CHINESE AND DOMINICANS
Vivian Louie
To cite this article: Vivian Louie (2006) GROWING UP ETHNIC IN TRANSNATIONAL WORLDS: IDENTITIES AMONG SECOND-GENERATION CHINESE AND DOMINICANS, Identities, 13:3, 363-394, DOI: 10.1080/10702890600838118 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10702890600838118
Published online: 22 Sep 2006.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1182
View related articles
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gide20

Download by: [Rutgers University]

Date: 02 March 2016, At: 13:50

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power, 13:363-394, 2006 Copyright (c) Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN: 1070-289X print / 1547-3384 online DOI: 10.1080/10702890600838118
Growing Up Ethnic in Transnational Worlds: Identities among Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans
Vivian Louie Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Transnationalism refers to the phenomenon of immigrants maintaining connections to their country of origin and using a dual frame of reference to evaluate their experiences and outcomes in the country in which they have settled. How does transnationalism matter in the identities among the second generation? This article argues that growing up with parents who want children to participate in their homeland imaginary and in a strong transnational social field does not necessarily mean second-generation Dominicans and Chinese will themselves adopt transnational orientations and/or practices. I find that my Chinese respondents, because of authoritarian parent-child relationships, relative loss of the ethnic language, and scarcity of contact with their parents' countries of origin, viewed themselves as mainly ethnic subjects. Identities for my Chinese respondents involved a generational- and class-specific ethnic identity grounded in the enclaves and perceived rarefaction vis-a-vis mainstream America. My Dominican respondents, because of greater communication within the family, ethnic language maintenance, and the very frequent number of trips they made to the Dominican Republic, drew from both transnational and ethnic orientations, meaning they situated who they were within both national contexts. Although my Dominican respondents acknowledged the differences between Dominicans "back there" and themselves, they spoke cogently on class, gender, and the color line there as well as here. At the same time, their identities were informed by their pan-ethnicity in the United States, namely, how Latinos and Dominicans, in particular, are perceived.
Key Words: transnationalism, ethnicity, social class, second generation, identity
How does transnationalism matter in the identities among secondgeneration1 immigrants in the United States? The concept of transnationalism challenges the long-held idea that immigrants leave their country of origin behind as they migrate and are incorporated and then assimilated into a new national context (Gordon 1964). According to Glick Schiller, Basch, and Blanc-Szanton (1992), immigrants "forge and sustain multi-stranded relations that link together their societies of origin and settlement," rather than experience a rupture in their attachments (p. 7). The premise of this article is that while
363

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

364 V. Louie
immigrants tend to view the country they have moved to as their home, and their children certainly do, it is nonetheless important to consider how "the old country" is situated in their lives, and the differences therein. This is particularly important given the increasingly globalized world in which we now live.
The emergent literature shows that similar to the first generation, second-generation individuals can experience transnationalism at the level of practice, (e.g., back-and-forth movement, remittances, business interests, and political involvement) (Itzigsohn et al. 1999; Portes, Guarnizo, and Landolt 1999). However, even in the absence of actual connections to the parental country of origin, a dual frame of reference can have symbolic meaning for second-generation individuals, at the level of orientations (Espiritu and Tran 2002; Wolf 2002). Furthermore, ethnicity may have more relevance to the second-generation experience. Ethnicity, commonly understood to be a sense of group belonging grounded in the idea of common ancestry, history, and culture, is a strong element of identities, and along with race, gender, and class, matter in how individuals make sense of who they are (Cornell and Hartmann 1998). Given that second-generation individuals have spent most, if not all, their lives in the United States, the relationship between ethnicity and transnationalism can take on a generational character (Kasinitz et al. 2002). Thus, second-generation children can engage in transnational attachments, and at the same time, develop ethnic identities that would have little meaning in the parental country of origin, and indeed, to their parents.
In this article, I examine the role of ethnic and transnational orientations in the identities of second-generation Chinese and Dominicans, particularly how they use such orientations to situate themselves vis-a-vis racial, class, and gender hierarchies. My respondents are similar insofar as they tended to come from working-class families situated within comparatively strong transnational fields. Such fields were nonetheless influenced by the very different political and economic relations between the United States, the Dominican Republic, and the Asian nations, which have been sending sources of Chinese immigrants. My analysis focuses on the following dimensions: the family homes in which my respondents grew up, the representations of the parental country of origin therein, their actual engagement (or absence of engagement) with these representations and the parental homeland itself, and what this means for how they view themselves along ethnic and/or transnational lines.
I find that my Chinese respondents, because of authoritarian parent-child relationships, relative loss of the ethnic language, and scarcity of contact with their parents' countries of origin, viewed

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

365

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

themselves as mainly ethnic subjects. Their perspective was grounded in the United States context, with little discussion of contemporary regionalism, gender, politics, or social class systems in their parents' countries of origin. My Dominican respondents, because of greater communication within the family, ethnic language maintenance, and the very frequent number of trips made to the Dominican Republic, drew from both transnational and ethnic orientations, meaning they situated who they were within both national contexts. Although my Dominican respondents acknowledged the differences between Dominicans "back there" and themselves, they spoke cogently on class, gender, and the color line there as well as here. At the same time, their identities were informed by their pan-ethnicity in the United States, namely, how Latinos and Dominicans, in particular, are perceived.
Theoretical perspectives
Due to the combined factors of technology, the spread of capitalism, and political developments in a global context, contemporary transnational practices tend to be more regular, routine, and occurring in larger numbers than in the past (Levitt, DeWind, and Vertovec 2003; Portes 2003). Studies of immigrant transnationalism, both historical and contemporary, have been characterized by four major themes.2 First, attention has been paid to the role of migrants as citizens of nation-states, in particular, their regional and political attachments, and the more recent efforts of nation-states to reclaim their allegiance through "ideas of nation, blood, and race in nationalist rhetoric" (Guarnizo 1998b; Glick Schiller 1999; Hsu 2000; Louie 2001; Benton 2003). Second is the role of transnational markets, entrepreneurs and capital, particularly in the development of ethnic communities and ethnic enclaves (Zhou 1992; Portes and Grosfoguel 1994; Lin 1995, 1998; Fong 1996; Grasmuck and Grosfoguel 1997; Smart and Smart 1998; Zhou and Cai 2002). Third has been the distinctive and intense circular flow of migrants and their children and commodities facilitated by relatively inexpensive modern transportation and technology (Duany 1994b; Guarnizo 1998a; Portes, Guarnizo and Landolt 1999). Fourth are the national and individual identities of transnational actors, notably Aihwa Ong's (1999) studies of the lives of contemporary transnational actors in Asia, particularly elites, at the intersection of politics and global markets.
Studies on Dominican immigrants have demonstrated the material and symbolic advantages that can accompany transnationalism. In their back-and-forth movements, Dominican migrants have become major players in the Dominican economy through remittances and "as consumers, producers of goods, and providers of services" (Guarnizo

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

366 V. Louie
1994: 78). Meanwhile, by comparing themselves with Dominicans of their social strata back in the homeland, particularly in their ability to purchase consumer goods like a color TV in the United States, the immigrants can claim a middle-class identity. This not only contradicts the poor and working-class status that they have in the United States but provides them the "emotional resources" to cope with the struggles attendant to that status (Grasmuck and Pessar 1991; Levitt 2001). There is, however, a downside, as migrants are sometimes negatively characterized as "dominicanyorks," who show off their relative wealth back on the island, and thus inauthentically Dominican (Guarnizo 1994: 80).
The literature on second-generation transnationalism has focused on both practices and perspectives. The Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Study (CILS)3 shows a relatively sparse level of transnational attachments, based on such subjective measures as "which place feels most like home," and objective measures such as remittances and frequency of trips made to parents' country of origin. Across national origins, Rumbaut (2002: 90) identified only "small pockets of transnational possibility" among second-generation individuals. Meanwhile, the Immigrant Generation in Metropolitan New York Study4 focuses on homeland trips, circular migration, engagement with politics and use of media of the parental country of origin, and remittances. In part because of geographic proximity, secondgeneration Dominicans reported the most transnational activity, with Colombians, Ecuadorians, Peruvians, and West Indians also fairly transnational on such measures. The Chinese and Russian Jewish respondents in the study had markedly lower levels of transnational activities. Furthermore, there was only a minority of cases where there was "sustained commitment to maintaining meaningful ties to the parental home societies" (Kasinitz et al. 2002: 117).
Bilingual language fluency assumes a critical role in understanding transnational behaviors among the second generation, because fluency is not a given in the way that it is for the first generation. Jones-Correra (2002) argues that to identify closely with the parental country of origin, and certainly to participate fully there, second-generation individuals would likely need a level of fluency in the ethnic language. Data from both CILS and the Immigrant Second Generation in Metropolitan New York Study suggest that members of the second generation from Spanish-speaking countries are more likely to be fluently bilingual (Kasinitz et al. 2002; Rumbaut 2002). This finding is consistent with the higher likelihood of Latinos to have transnational attachments.
Time of the life course also influences transnational participation among second-generation individuals. Drawing from her study of

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

367

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

Irish, Dominicans, and Indians in the greater Boston metropolitan area, Levitt (2002) argues that a cross-sectional approach can miss out on the many possible scenarios of transnational involvement. Participation can occur on a regular basis, or in a periodic fashion over a span of years, and/or in an intense response to a particular event (Levitt 2002: 144). Transnational life, as experienced by second-generation Mexicans in Smith's study (2002), also ebbed and flowed according to the life course. According to Smith, the peak comes in the high school and college years, a time of life when ethnic identities are negotiated within various social contexts, with a decline as individuals enter their twenties and encounter additional constraints on their time.
Racial, ethnic, and class inequalities in the United States can influence the meanings of transnational attachments. Several researchers have argued that ties to the parental country of origin offer a way for the second generation to cope with their own marginalization in the United States. In Smith's (2002) study, transnational engagements provide the Mexicans in New York City a way to distinguish themselves from African Americans and Puerto Ricans, the groups that they interact with most frequently. Haitians, who have been racialized as black in the United States and unfairly associated with being HIV positive, seek a way of coping with racial discrimination and diminished economic opportunities (Fouron and Glick Schiller 2002).
Social contexts, such as the family and ethnic enclaves, can facilitate the development of second-generation transnational practices and/or orientations. The family context is where children first get a sense of who they are and where they are from (Waters 1990; Tuan 1998). Within the home, immigrants can and often do transplant rituals and material objects from their journey. For the migrants themselves, the rituals and objects bear meaning of their past lives as they begin new ones in a different cultural context (Ahmed et al. 2003). The children of immigrants, however, undergo this process of "homebuilding" as one mediated by their parents (Espiritu and Tran 2002). The enclaves, meanwhile, can serve as another factor; one needs to be careful, however, about assuming a linear link between transnational social spaces such as the enclaves and transnationalism among the children of immigrants. Even in these social spaces, second-generation individuals can have ethnic rather than transnational orientations. As much as West Indian communities in New York replicate the culture and news of the islands, second-generation individuals find that being West Indian does not necessarily involve direct interaction with the West Indies; thus, they claim ethnic, rather than transnational, identities (Vickerman 2002).

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

368 V. Louie
Lastly, it is necessary to parse out the distinct ways in which transnationalism and ethnicity can both contribute to identity development and how such processes can be generationally bounded. Two examples from New York City are instructive in this regard (Kasinitz et al. 2002). The first is the existence of Ecuadorian/Mexican transnational businesses that provide immigrant customers from the two nations native products and/or international money transfers. Such transnational businesses must be understood in the context of ethnicity, namely, the fact that both Ecuadorian and Mexican immigrants are incorporated into the same neighborhoods, similar jobs, and seen in similar ways by native New Yorkers. In short, it is the ethnic affinity of the two groups in New York City that gives rise to a transnational business such as EcuaMex. The second example involves second-generation Colombians, Ecuadorians, and Peruvians. Although they are careful to distinguish themselves from Puerto Ricans, they do identify as Hispanic, and are forming ethnic identities specific to the New York City context. Such identities, however, would have little relevance to residents of Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru, and even to their own immigrant parents. That said, such ethnic identity development can occur alongside transnational attachments (Kasinitz et al. 2002: 103).
The Dominican and Chinese comparison
In the Northeast region of the United States, both the Dominicans and Chinese are associated with mainly urban ethnic communities that represent strong transnational fields. However, there are significant differences in the history of those communities, the relations between the United States and the sending sources of immigrants that created them, and the role of transnational capital in their development. The focus of this discussion will mainly be New York City's Washington Heights, a Dominican enclave, and various Chinese enclaves.
The history of Manhattan's Chinatown, located in the Lower East Side, dates back to the 1870s when it served as a destination for Chinese immigrant male laborers fleeing the often violent nativist sentiments directed at them in the western United States. The contemporary Chinese enclaves, including Manhattan's Chinatown, and its two satellites, Flushing in Queens, and Sunset Park in Brooklyn, reflect markedly different processes of transnational attachments and power relations between the immigrants' countries of origin and the United States. The key, as it was with many immigrant groups, was the Immigration Act of 1965, which resumed large-scale immigration to the United States after more than several decades of a de facto closed door policy.5 In the Chinese case, the new immigration has been

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

369

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

characterized by regional diversity in sending sources both within Mainland China and across Asia, accompanied by class bifurcation: highly educated professionals, who tend to work in jobs in the mainstream economy and live in the suburbs, and workers with relatively low levels of formal schooling, who tend to work in the ethnic enclaves (Louie 2004).
Another pivotal event since the 1960s was the development of Taiwan, Hong Kong, and other Asian nation-states as economic powerhouses, the so-called tiger economies. Macro transnational exchanges6 had their roots in the surplus reserves of capitalists in these nations and the desire of American urban planners and public officials to tap into it as a way to stimulate "local economies and to raise tax revenues and property values" (Lin 1995: 342). The wealth of overseas Chinese investors could be seen in many facets of life in the Chinese enclaves, including real estate speculation, the rise of a transnationalized banking industry, and investment in the garment industry. Consequently, Chinese immigrants of poor, rural origins are but one social class group in contemporary Chinese enclaves. Furthermore, the enclaves themselves have been shaped by distinctly different social forces than the ones that gave rise to the Chinatowns of old, notably "a transnational circuit of capital linked with world-city development under advanced monopoly capitalism" (Lin 1995: 339).
By contrast with the deep history of Chinese presence in the United States, Dominican immigration is a post-1960s phenomenon. The Dominican migrants tended to be from urban, working-class backgrounds with some measure of skills and resources; once in the United States, however, they typically started off in low-wage, manual labor jobs, with some turning to small business enterprises such as Spanish bodegas, "retail trade, urban transportation, and garment contracting" (Portes and Grosfoguel 1994: 63). As noted earlier, transnational networks in the Dominican immigrant communities have been culturally, politically, and economically expansive, with migrants investing strongly in the homeland economy. The result has been linkages between the Dominican Republic "with the very centers of the world economy" (Portes and Grosfoguel 1994: 67). However, in contrast to the Chinese, the flow of wealth has not been bidirectional; thus, Washington Heights does not have the substantial transnational investments available to the Chinese enclaves.7
In addition, the Dominican/Chinese comparison is interesting because they belong to pan-ethnic groups that have been perceived8 differently in the United States. Generally speaking, Latinos have been typified in the national collective consciousness as underachievers--likely to turn to crime, have too many kids, desire welfare, and

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

370 V. Louie
fail in schools and ultimately in life--and Asians as overachievers-- likely to emphasize education, sacrifice for later gain, do well in school and climb the mobility ladder (Fukuyama 1994; Espenshade and Belanger 1997; Rumbaut 1997).
Methods
The materials presented here9 draw from interviews with 39 Dominicans and 40 Chinese Americans, all who had some postsecondary schooling. With each group, I administered a survey to collect demographic information such as place of birth, parent's country and region of origin, educational history, and language use. The interviews generally lasted 90 minutes, although they lasted 3 to 4 hours with some of the Dominican respondents, and were tape recorded and transcribed. In the Chinese sample, I recruited participants at Hunter, a public commuter college, and Columbia, the Ivy League university, through faculty contacts, and presentations that I made in person in classes, and ethnic and non-ethnic student groups at the two schools. In the Dominican sample, I did the same at a private, four-year college and a public, two-year college in the greater Boston area and relied on referrals from community organizations, which yielded both currently enrolled students and alumni; in total, the Dominican respondents came from more than twenty post-secondary institutions across a range of rankings.
The Dominican and Chinese samples were quite similar in being largely American-born or arriving by the age of five, with about 18 percent in each arriving between the ages of six and ten.10 While the transition of older foreign-born children is arguably more complex, especially with regards to English language acquisition (Jones-Correa 2002), I found that birthplace/age of arrival did not have a marked difference on transnational orientations. Women were the majority of the respondents: 70 percent among the Chinese and 59 percent with the Dominicans, highlighting the difficulty with recruiting men.
About 49 percent of the Dominican respondents grew up in mainly Dominican enclaves with transnational flows, such as New York City's Washington Heights area; Jamaica Plain in Boston; Lawrence, in greater Boston; and Miami (Duany 1994b; Levitt 2001). Another 28 percent grew up in urban, mostly Latino American neighborhoods, where co-ethnics were joined by Puerto Ricans, or to a lesser extent, Central and South Americans.11 About half had one or both parents working in low-level jobs in sales, factories, and amongst the mothers, secretarial work. Meanwhile, about 62 percent of my Chinese respondents lived in the Chinese enclaves of New York City, or in other

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

371

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

neighborhoods with high numbers of Chinese immigrants (Ong and Umemoto 2000; Wallin, Schill and Daniels 2002). About 74 percent had parents who were involved with the Chinese enclave economy, mainly in labor-intensive jobs in the restaurant business or with the garment industry.
It should be noted that the reach of the findings presented here is limited by several methodological factors. My sample was neither random nor representative. Most of my respondents had grown up in transnational social fields. In addition, the sample was limited to members of the second generation, who had some form of post-secondary education. Thus, while this work may contribute to our understanding of how second-generation Dominicans and Chinese understand their identities through ethnic and transnational orientations, the findings cannot be generalized to all Dominicans and Chinese.
Growing up ethnic in transnational worlds
In this section I discuss how the parent-child relationship in the home, combined with ethnic language maintenance or shift, influence the respondents' understandings of ethnic holidays and family histories as mediated by their families. Then I turn to the respondents' actual experiences, or lack thereof, with visits to the parental homeland.
Ethnic identities among the Chinese
To understand the identities of my second-generation Chinese respondents, one has to start with the relative lack of emotional connectedness and physical affection with their parents. This is not to say that my respondents felt a lack of care from their parents; they consistently spoke of their family, and more broadly speaking the Chinese family, in terms of strong ties--parents caring for their children's well-being, and children caring for their parents in their old age. However, these family ties were not expressed in the emotional "closeness" that my respondents wished to have. Thus, it often seemed that the children and parents occupied different spaces in the home that did not necessarily overlap. When discussing his parents, Victor described them as typical of Chinese families: "You know, they weren't very talkative. It's just like that with the Chinese families, very quiet, a lot of unspoken words."
According to my respondents, the only available lines of communication between themselves and their parents were when parents "commanded" them to do something (Sung 1987). As my respondents intuited, this is reminiscent of the traditional Chinese hierarchal family structure.12 My respondents reported that their parents did not

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

372 V. Louie
value dialogue with their children, regardless of how it was expressed (e.g., a simple opinion or question volunteered by children or outright opposition to parental wishes). Kathy, for example, had had a tumultuous relationship with her parents over her decision to drop out of college, join the labor force, and take time to find out what she wanted to do with her life. Her plans to "find herself" met with disapproval and opposition from her parents, who expected the children to go straight from high school to college and then to complete college in a timely fashion. Neither Kathy nor her brother, who dropped out of high school and was now involved, she suspected, in a life of petty crime, managed to meet that goal.
Kathy: And if you come from a Chinese or Asian background, there's no such thing. You follow the rules, you do what you're supposed to do. But I was never that kind of a person that did what I was supposed to do, you know. I think I rebelled but unconsciously. And I couldn't go to them [parents] because they couldn't understand . . . I don't care for Chinese culture, the parents are the parents, and they're always right.
The loss of the ethnic language amongst the Chinese second generation further contributed to the distancing between children and parents. Even when children sought to engage their parents beyond the authoritarian model of parent-child relations, they often found themselves stymied by their lack of Chinese fluency and their parents' lack of fluency in English. Consistent with the relative absence of fluent bilingualism among immigrant children from Asian nations (Portes and Rumbaut 2001; Rumbaut 2002), close to 60 percent of the Chinese in this study reported being functional speakers and listeners of Chinese, with another 20 percent saying they had minimal ability and 5 percent said they could neither speak nor understand the language. The percentages were significantly lower when it came to fluency in reading and writing. Only 15 percent reported a functional knowledge in this domain, with 43 percent having minimal knowledge, and 40 percent who said they could neither read nor write. Such patterns of language shift occurred despite the efforts of the Chinese immigrant parents to enroll their children in ethnic language schools.
According to my respondents, this lack of fluency was a key obstacle to communicating with parents about complex issues, whether personal or political. Kathy, who described herself as functional in speaking and understanding Chinese, thus discussed her frustration not only with her parents' reluctance to accept her choices but also with her sheer inability to get her point across about such matters. She observed:

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

373

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

I do find it extremely difficult to communicate with them simply because I cannot, like with my mother, I cannot express myself in Cantonese. I just cannot. I don't have that vocabulary. And in English, she will have a hard time to understand me. So, you know, there's that barrier.
The dynamics of the parent-child relationship among the Chinese immigrant families, grounded as it was in parental authoritarianism, silences,13 and a language barrier, influenced how the children interacted with the home life that their immigrant parents created. For the second generation, the home serves as a symbolic connection to the family's country of origin much as it does for their parents. The crucial distinction is that for the children, the representation of the home as "a place in the past" is mediated by their parents--who themselves have strong material connections to that past while the children do not. For the second generation, the family is central to understanding how the meanings behind the material objects and habits in the homing process, to borrow from Ahmed et al. (2003), become known or not known. For example, Grace discussed her family's home life in the context of physically leaving behind one's homeland but not symbolically.
I think they would just consider themselves Chinese living in America. They're (naturalized) citizens, but they would still listen to Chinese radio programs, find out about news in China. I mean my grandfather, he loves watching the 10 o'clock news in the Mandarin channel. Even though they live in America, they would still do their Chinese things. You have Chinatown. You can do all the Chinese New Year stuff. The Chinese lunar calendar, they still go by that. They just brought over whatever values they had there.
The values of the parents, as represented in the home, were not necessarily those of their American-born and/or -raised children. In fact, there were distinct, generationally bound spaces in the home, as evidenced by the children's disengagement from the ethnic holidays observed by their parents. Although my respondents felt compelled to perform the rituals, my respondents rarely knew what the holidays were called, why the holidays were being celebrated, and what exactly they were doing to celebrate them. Nor did they know the names (in Chinese or English) of the various objects used in the rituals, themselves products of transnational markets sold in the enclaves, beyond incense. Rather, the holidays became markers of ethnic food and foreignness (Louie 2003, 2004).
This is Peggy's take on the celebration of ethnic holidays in her home:

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

374 V. Louie
Chinese New Year. We had to like, like eat certain things on certain days. I don't know their names. The mooncake thing, eating (the wrapped leaves), the white dough things. (In the soup?) Yeah. Like, we can't wash our hair on some days.
And this is how Peggy framed the generational gap in the cultural practices of Chinese Americans, whom she defined as those born in the United States, or who migrated at an early age, and those of immigrant adults like her parents.
Chinese-Americans, I guess they can identify more to reality whereas I think the traditional Chinese deals a lot with superstitions. Where the Chinese-American would be like, "Okay, well, I can understand why you believe in your superstitions but then again, you know, you can't have this because X, Y, and Z." There's like an explanation behind superstitions as opposed to just believing superstitions.
The lack of parent-child dialogue and the loss of ethnic language among the children also meant that my second-generation Chinese respondents lacked insight into the general history of the parental homeland (in most cases, China and Hong Kong) and the specifics of their own family histories. The idea of "being Chinese" was unmoored from a symbolic connection to the parental homeland, a known family tree, and the emotional lives of their parents back there. In a few cases, the respondent did not even know where a parent was born, and in others, the particulars of when and how their parents came to migrate. My respondents were aware of the absence. Annette remarked: "When like you talk about your family or your family history, I think it adds like a certain, I don't know, flair to it [home life]."
In those instances where parents did share stories of the homeland, my respondents report that a minimum of details was provided. Moreover, the goal was to regulate children's behavior in the United States rather than to paint a richer picture of family history or life back there, as the respondents wanted (Espiritu and Tran 2002). Along these lines, Grace elaborated on her parents' use of the homeland to police her social behavior.
Hanging out at night. They think, when we're watching those Chinese movies, they think we're bad, we're all doing drugs. They'll think we're bad, little slutty girls running around. But in other countries, that's when you go out. So I had major conflicts with that. I think it's fine, it's nothing, it's normal, but they think otherwise. And maybe it's also a trust.

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

375

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

College proved to be important in my respondents' identity development along these lines. As Erikson (1968) proposed, the college years mark the time when an individual frames his or her identity in terms of other persons, institutions, and the social and historical contexts in which he or she is embedded. As they were literally expanding their horizons beyond the family home, some of my respondents nonetheless found themselves redirecting their attentions back to home life via the college curriculum, notably in Chinese language, Asian American Studies, and East Asian Languages and Civilizations. The reasons for taking the class could be instrumental--the class fit a time slot, for instance--and yet, my respondents found themselves unexpectedly filling in crucial gaps in their knowledge.
The irony was that my respondents were taking Mandarin classes, typically the only Chinese language offered in college, rather than the Chinese dialect that in most cases was their home language. Peggy, whose family was Cantonese-speaking, nonetheless thought that studying Mandarin would facilitate her Cantonese (other respondents found this not to be the case, as they struggled with learning to speak Mandarin), and establish greater emotional intimacy with her parents. She remarked: "I thought that Mandarin would bring me closer to knowing a Chinese dialect. Like, if I started learning Mandarin, that would bring me closer to learning Cantonese, and that would bring me closer to like communicating with my parents."
For others like Ivory, the goal was not emotional intimacy but power. According to Ivory, her skillfulness in Chinese and her knowledge of Chinese history finally gave her the upper hand in her relationship with her grandparents.
It's something to prove to myself. I wanted to be more well-versed in Chinese history than my grandparents are cause they can't tell me that I'm not Chinese. I'm like aware of Chinese history. I've written papers. I speak the language. Now I read it and write it. Yeah. And I'm fluent in like three dialects. So they can't rank on me anymore.
Just as their homeland imaginaries, as mediated by the family, were sparse, so were my respondent's actual experiences with the ancestral homeland. Nearly three-fourths of my Chinese respondents either had never been to the parental country of origin or had visited only once, sometimes at very young ages that left little memory imprint on them. Eight percent had been to the parental homeland twice, and 14 percent had visited between three to four times. Again, this is reflective of their social class background. My respondents and their families were not the transnational Chinese elites living in Southeast Asia (Ong 1999), or

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

376 V. Louie
those fueling the economic development of the Chinese enclaves in New York City. Consistent with the relatively few number of trips taken, my Chinese respondents tended to describe these visits through the lens of a tourist, rather than a revisiting of the familiar. Just as the traditions they celebrated in the home with their parents were somehow "foreign" to them, so was visiting the parental homeland.
The sense of foreignness was heightened by the reaction some of my respondents reported from those "other Chinese" (Kibria 2002). Ivory, who had chafed at her grandparents' role as arbiters of authentic Chinese-ness, ran into the same judgment from her cousins, as can be seen in this reflection:
I hated [Hong Kong and China] (laugh). Once again, you're American. You're not Chinese. Don't even claim that you're Chinese. The whole competitive aspect. Like in Hong Kong, my cousins would actually look at me, and go, you're so disgusting. Why are you dressed like this? Your pants are ripped. At the time, I had pants with holes at the knees, I mean, really minor holes. But still, it looks shabby, and coming from the United States and dressed like an American.
Given this lack of belonging, most of my Chinese respondents did not envision themselves settling in the homeland, although a few thought they might have greater opportunities there if they could improve their Chinese skills.
In contrast to the lack of belonging my second-generation Chinese respondents reported in Asia, they experienced a strong ethnic identity in the United States. In other words, although they were not transnational social actors, they were very much ethnic actors in the United States context. Their ethnic identity was grounded at several levels: their generational take of growing up in the transnational social fields of the enclaves, and at the same time, maintaining a selfdescribed expansiveness that came from having grown up in the United States, which they saw as further distinguishing them from the immigrant generation.
The generational take on growing up in a transnational social field was not quite immediately evident, because it was common for my Chinese respondents to call themselves Chinese, rather than Chinese American. As Lan observed: "What's Chinese about me? I still watch Chinese movies, sing Chinese songs, you know, celebrate Chinese culture, you know." Or as Linda remarked: "Since day one, I came to America, I've been exposed to Chinatown. I like everything about it. And 15 years in America, I only basically eat Chinese food." It did become evident, however, as the respondents elaborated on the

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

377

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

specifics of their cultural practices. Thus, Lan's tastes in Chinese music ran toward pop singers, and not traditional opera, and Linda would argue with her mother about her immediate goal of pursuing graduate school rather than getting married (as her mother wanted her to do, and which both mother and daughter considered consistent with traditional Chinese culture). In short, while my respondents talked about themselves as being Chinese in the enclaves, they were not talking about the cultural practices of the immigrant generation of their parents, more recently arrived young adults, or youth in Asian nations, who were likely listening to the same kinds of Asian pop music. Rather, they were speaking of a generationally bounded ethnic and class identity specific to the United States (Louie 2003, 2004; Kasinitz, Mollenkopf and Waters 2004).
Another key aspect of my respondents' ethnic identity was the fact they considered themselves more "exposed" to American cultures than their parents or recently arrived co-ethnic youth. At the same time that Grace, for example, enjoyed being steeped in the vibrant culture(s) of Chinatown, she also appreciated her everyday sojourns uptown to Hunter College. Consistent with the racial and ethnic diversity of New York City, where at least one in four public school students was foreign-born, and half lived in homes where English was not the main language spoken (Sachs 1999), the 1997 student composition at Hunter was predominately minority (e.g., 20.1 percent black, 23.3 percent Hispanic, 17.3 percent Asian or Pacific Islander, and 0.2 percent Native American or Alaskan) (Hunter College Catalog 1995- 1998 [1995]). According to Grace, the fact that she was born and raised in the United States gave her particular appreciation of this diversity: "Like I love it, when I came to Hunter, because I was away from this whole Chinese thing. `Cause America is like what we see on TV, it's not only Asians, it's blacks, Spanish. I really enjoy being in a mixed atmosphere." Similar to Grace, some of my other Chinese respondents spoke of listening to hip hop music in addition to Chinese pop music from Hong Kong and Taiwan, embracing a multicultural youth culture in the city (Kasinitz, Mollenkopf and Waters 2004).
My Chinese respondents also had to negotiate the prevalent panethnic representations of Asian Americans in the American mainstream. The model minority stereotype casts Asian Americans, across ethnicity and social class, as academic overachievers, particularly in mathematics and the sciences. The reasons supposedly have to do with an immigrant family ethos privileging accommodation, discipline and hard work. Even if they did not all use the specific term, model minority, its assumptions were very real to my respondents, as expressed in media representations and in routine social encounters.

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

378 V. Louie
The model minority was simply a part of everyday life that they had to navigate. To borrow the concept of the Suarez-Orozcos (2001), the model minority was a social mirror that reflected a distorted image of Asian Americans with discernible effects on the identities of those so construed. Consider the following comments relayed by Ling, who worked part-time at a local museum, and had to define herself against the expectations that Asian Americans were passive:
When I work [at] the museum, just the fact that I'm Asian, they start talking to me about Chinese issues. They'll tell me, a lot of Chinese people here are very quiet and passive. And since I talk, I mean at work, I'm very energetic, I'm pretty outgoing. They used to think it was kind of weird. They don't expect that from me. Or if I tell them I went to Brooklyn Technical HS, even though I wasn't involved with any of the technical things there, they immediately assume I'm a computer freak.
Another perception of Asian Americans was that they were well off, which according to United States Census data has some basis in fact in the aggregate, but masks much of the differentiation across and within ethnic groups (Espiritu 1997; Louie 2004). In the excerpt below, Julia, the daughter of a retired chef and seamstress who still lived with them in a Chinatown tenement apartment, pointed out the mismatch between this image and her own family circumstances. Of particular interest was the racial dimension of the exchange she described. Her comments point to the underlying tension that some have argued is implicit to the model minority stereotype, namely, how it is used to divide minority groups, with Asians held up as the group that supposedly "made it" versus "underachieving" blacks and Latinos (Louie 2004).
Julia: Well the thing is that maybe some of the stereotypes are truthful to some people. But you can't generalize everyone to that stereotype . . . . I encountered one of my friend's mother who assumed that I was rich. So my friend asked me, "Are you rich?" And I'm like, "No, I mean, I'm just as poor as you are." She lived in Harlem. She's African American. And I lived in Chinatown. So we're from very different backgrounds. We lived 20 miles apart. To her mother, I was rich. And I was laughing so hard. I was like, "You can't be serious, you know."
Meanwhile, Peggy highlighted the complexities that came with being identified as part of a group associated with achievement, rather than underachievement.
Like we didn't have to deal with that specific racism that African Americans have to deal with. And you know, why cast aspersions on

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

379

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

what is supposedly a good thing? You know, us Asian Americans, a model minority. It seems sort of silly to say anything bad about that.
Beyond the model minority image, which was largely gender-neutral, my respondents reported on negotiating gendered images of Asian Americans in mainstream culture. Robert pointed out the relative absence of Asian males in the media, and in his view, the few who were visible looked more mixed race in terms of physical characteristics.
The Chinese males do not get portrayed a lot. If they do, they're usually with Anglican features, they don't look Chinese Chinese or Asian Asian. Like the [TV] series, The Vanishing Son, a long time ago, the main character was half, mixed, and Earth to Final Conflict, the Asian guy there is not stereotypically Filipino, as I perceive Filipino males to be. Cheekbones a bit more Anglicized, eyes not as slanty.
Grace and Lily, friends at Hunter, spoke of the prevalent conceptions of Asian women as "submissive." Grace pointed to the "sex industry in Thailand," as one where women are portrayed as "there to please people, they don't give a shit." And Lily pointed to a portrayal of the Vietnam War as "American soldiers went over, and hey, there's all these Asian women, and they do whatever we want." According to them, historical context was missing from such portrayals, namely, that women in Vietnam and Thailand, like their female counterparts in post-Socialist Eastern Europe, were turning to the sex industries in the wake of economic devastation, few available opportunities, and the influx of foreigners, including Americans, seeking a market of sex. The two women found evidence of such gendered constructions in Chinatown itself, with voyeuristic "white guys" hanging out in streets and stores, trying to pick up random Chinese women, some of them their friends. Grace referred to a sense of violation when men from outside the enclaves felt entitled to visit in search of exotic female others, much as if the women were prostitutes.
Ethnic and transnational identities among the Dominicans
The parent-child relationship was also crucial to the identities of my Dominican respondents: in contrast to the Chinese, however, this relationship facilitated the children's acceptance of parental homeland imaginaries. The prevailing theme among my Dominican respondents was the open lines of communication in their families, generally speaking, and certainly, about the homeland. The role of language is important to highlight here. My Dominican respondents reported on

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

380 V. Louie
the relative ease of communication in their families due in part to their own maintenance of Spanish. Again, consistent with the trends found by Portes and Rumbaut (2001) and Rumbaut (2002), 77 percent of the Dominicans reported fluency in speaking and understanding the home language, as compared to only 15 percent of the Chinese. The remaining 23 percent of my Dominican respondents said they were functional speakers of Spanish. Although the percentages were lower for reading and writing Spanish, nonetheless, 54 percent reported they were fluent, and another 39 percent said they were functional. Three Dominican respondents reported that they had minimal writing and reading ability in Spanish; however, none said they could neither read nor write.
Unlike my Chinese respondents, who felt like outsiders to the traditions celebrated in the home, the Dominicans felt very much a part of the home formed by their immigrant parents. Referring to these traditions, which he described as Dominican culture, one young man simply said, "We lived it." The picture painted by my Dominican respondents was one where immigrant parents, extended kin, and the larger ethnic community made visible the markers of Dominican culture as they remembered it, whether it was the importance of the Virgin Mary, the national anthem, holidays, or everyday poems, nursery songs, and food. Parents routinely took out Spanish language books from the library to read to their young children and as the children grew older, to have them read for themselves; when the second generation became adults, parents shared their own Spanish language books with them. Family members were also on hand to provide more knowledge if asked. The ethnic community, itself transnational, was another source of information, and my respondents felt similarly at ease therein; in contrast with the Chinese, there was little sense of an immigrant space, and a second-generation space within the ethnic community, with little interaction between the two.
In short, my Dominican respondents did not view parental representations of the ancestral homeland as a mediated phenomenon, which had little meaning for them. Describing the constructions of Dominican-ness among the immigrant generation of her parents, a young woman, who grew up in Inwood near Washington Heights, noted: "I just got that naturally from [my mother], from my family, and from my neighbors and other people around me." Meanwhile, Carmen related the encouragement she received from her parents to engage in a dialogue with not only themselves but also the family writ large: "It would be like when we got family reunions. [My parents would] be like, why don't you tell them about this? You've learned about this and that. And I'm like, alright. It gets them excited to know that I've been interested."

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

381

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

Some respondents noted the generational differences along these lines in the parenting of the United States-born versus foreign-born children, who had spent some years in the Dominican Republic. According to Julli, who migrated at the age of nine, her parents did not need to make a strong effort with her since they felt she already had "real knowledge" from her childhood back there. The situation with her brothers, however, was different: "I would say that they are more demanding of my brothers, who were not born there, like `You will have to learn this, you will have to learn to write Spanish, how to speak Spanish well, about the history.'"
Others acknowledged the role of parents and immigrant elders, but also highlighted the agency of second-generation individuals. In the following reflections, Jose, who migrated at the age of five, frames the experiences of learning Spanish and relatedly, about the Dominican Republic as something he and his United States-born siblings wanted to do, rather than something they felt compelled to do.
I mean we didn't have to sit down and read Dominican history books or watch Dominican TV. It just kinda came out of us. Like my little sisters were born here and they feel more Dominican than I do. So it's like it came natural out of us to seek, you know, that knowledge about our home country. And I think it's just the way [our parents] raised us. They didn't particularly say you have to learn to speak Spanish, no, you can't speak English. We could've spoken English but we chose. Me and my sisters chose to speak Spanish just `cause.
In contrast to the Chinese case, there is also overlap between American and Dominican traditions. Holidays like Christmas, Mother's Day and Father's Day are a part of both national cultures. To be sure, there are also differences. My respondents pointed out that Mother's and Father's Days do not fall on the same dates in the two countries. Christmas is typically celebrated on December 24th in the Dominican Republic, with presents opened at midnight, rather than on December 25th, as commonly done in the United States. Some of the Dominican families celebrated both Three Kings Day and Christmas with "double presents." However, there were enough similarities that the Dominican holidays seemed more natural (and less foreign) to my respondents than was the case among their Chinese counterparts vis-a-vis Chinese holidays.
The idea of a co-construction of the homeland imaginary among the Dominican families was also evident in my respondents' knowledge of family and homeland histories, which was more extensive than among the Chinese. This contrast was apparent in the simple fact that the Dominicans often could name the specific town that their parents were

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

382 V. Louie
from, instead of just the general region. With the same ease, many discussed multiple facets of the parental homeland--the skin color hierarchy in the Dominican Republic, a family town, where many of the residents were believed to be descended from North American settlers, the perils of living under the Trujillo dictatorship, the varied lives of their grandparents as farmers, chauffeurs to politically connected employers, tailors, and the often chain migration of their kin to the United States. It was, as one respondent said, "the hand-me-down stuff"--markers of the past in the Dominican Republic, what to avoid and what to remember-- that "you tell your kids." In other words, it was the marker of the back there in the here and now and would also shape how they understood the racial and class hierarchies in the United States, as I will discuss shortly.
Similar to the Chinese, my Dominican respondents also remembered their parents' framing stories of the homeland to exhort their children to do better in the United States. The past recalled by parents--of violence, lack of running water and electricity--was used to remind the second generation of their opportunities here. Andres recalled one of his mother's stories about the Dominican Republic: "She would have to wake up at five or four in the morning. Cut salami. Kind of like cooked ham and cheese and get it ready for the workers that were working in the forest. It was pretty hard. She didn't want to be a part of that."
Another line of commonality with the Chinese was my Dominican respondents' use of school to enhance their knowledge of the homeland. My Dominican respondents reported on decisions to focus on the Dominican Republic in assignments for a world history class, or to take classes on Latin America and/or Latinos in the United States. In the process, some learned about the strong role played by the United States in the Dominican Republic, and were openly critical in response. Tomas commented:
You know, when I found out [the American government] kept the dictator [Trujillo] in power, and then they've always had that influence, that economic influence and that political influence in Latin America, that's why the countries never had a chance to develop, you know? `Cause these American guys sit in these rooms and they plan people's lives-- they play little war games. And they don't allow those countries to fully develop, because they exploit their resources. You know? That's why I felt very angry. That's sort of a little conflict there.
The key difference was that for my Dominican respondents, the knowledge acquired through coursework complemented what they already knew from their families; the lessons were thus additive rather than primary, which was the more typical scenario among the Chinese.

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

383

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

The fluidity of the back there in the here and now was evident in the frequency of trips taken to the Dominican Republic, a central feature of the transnational social fields in which my respondents' families were embedded. The back-and-forth movements in these fields were not limited to the more economically advantaged, as was the case with the Chinese. Rather, the families of my respondents were engaged in such movements as well, and so were the respondents themselves. The sheer frequency of visiting the Dominican Republic, and relatedly, the ease that my respondents reported feeling there further shaped the transnational orientations among my Dominican respondents. According to my respondents, the family home, the ethnic community, and the Dominican Republic were complementary worlds through which they moved, sometimes seamlessly. Stella described her frequent trips to the Dominican Republic as maintaining the culture she grew up with in the home and in her neighborhood. The trips, she said, were a way to "get the culture." Tomas, for example, traveled to the Dominican Republic every summer until he started college, and sometimes Christmas too, often with his mother. The Dominican Republic, he reported, was his "escape" from Boston, and he always felt an acceptance there, which was expressed at its simplest level, in the language. He said: "It felt good to go to a country where people spoke Spanish."
Although some did not think of themselves as natives, they still acknowledged their connections to the Dominican Republic. Lisa, for example, described her status as somewhere between tourist and native. It was true that she did not live in the island nation on a daily basis, or even a seasonal one. Yet, she had lived there for a summer when she was seven, and stayed for a month when she was fourteen. Her parents continued to own property in the capital, and it was her father's goal to eventually retire there. For my Dominican respondents, the sense of belonging they felt in the homeland made the possibility of living there a real one. In fact, some had left the United States as children to live and go to school in the Dominican Republic for a year or more. Although few were certain they would end up living and/ or settling in the Dominican Republic, the idea had at least occurred to a number of my respondents. The barrier lay not with a sense of foreignness but more with reservations about the lower standard of living and fewer economic opportunities there or a fear of too much gemeinschaft and the consequent lack of anonymity.
Tomas: I used to want to [live in the DR]. But no. The quality of life there is not up to what I'm used to living here. You know? Everything from the income, the health care, education. There's more opportunities in Boston, you know. It's not like I'm in Chicago! I mean, it's not like I'm

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

384 V. Louie
in Idaho or Iowa. This is the hub right here. This is a lot of resources for my children. This is the place I want to stay.
The transnational orientations provided a way for my Dominican respondents to understand their incorporation in the United States. However, as they were the second generation, the United States also furnished a powerful frame of reference, whether it was the attitudes of co-ethnics or prevailing stereotypes surrounding Latinos.
The dual frame of reference was clearly evident in how my Dominican respondents understood racial inequality. On the one hand, they drew on historical and existing conceptions of blackness and inequality in the Dominican Republic, as shaped by its contentious relationship with Haiti (Torres Saillant 1998). They knew this from stories and expectations passed on by family members and from firsthand experiences visiting the Dominican Republic. Consistent with the literature, my respondents understood blackness as being very stigmatized in the Dominican Republic, but at the same time, part of a wide range of racial categories there (Duany 1994a; Bailey 2001). Thus, they did not talk only about whiteness, but about lightness. On the other hand, my respondents drew on conceptions of blackness and inequality in the United States, which has been a black/white binary model working in the opposite direction, "with perceived, recorded or imagined African ancestry" classifying an individual as black (Davis 1991; Bailey 2001: 696). My respondents also had to situate themselves vis-a-vis the increasing racial and ethnic diversity in the United States, due largely to post-1965 immigration. It in this space, between two worlds with very different patterns of racial identification and racial inequality, that my respondents did their identity work.
For example, Charles was one of many respondents who noted the mixing of peoples that had occurred in the Dominican Republic. He described the island nation as a rich tapestry of peoples, including the native Indians and the Spaniards, who assumed power and later brought in Africans as slaves. The result was "very mixed," as he observed; in everyday life, there was not a set standard of Dominicanness along the lines of physical characteristics: "There's Dominicans that look my color, darker than me, or even some with blonde hair and blue eyes."
My respondents were just as quick to observe that this mix of peoples notwithstanding, there was a clear racial hierarchy in the Dominican Republic, which provoked ambivalence in them. In contrast to what they described as the prevailing attitudes in the Dominican Republic, my respondents tended to be more critical about the

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

385

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

stigmatization attached to blackness. Many, in fact, challenged the mythology of whiteness in the Dominican Republic, even if that meant contradicting their parents (Bailey 2001). Thus, Lara observed:
Many Dominicans are very racist towards blacks. Even Haitians. And so they like to exclude that part from their Dominican side, and they say no, like if you have black kinky hair, you know, if you have really curly hair, than you must be like from a bad race or bad blood. It's like no, you're not black, you're Dominican. And don't hang around black people because they are of a lower class. This is still in the Dominican Republic.
Lourdes, who pointed to race as the "most important thing in the Dominican community," remembered discussing this topic in her college sociology class on Latinos in the United States
And my professor was like "Well, you know, there's not that many White Dominicans." I'm like "Hello! You know, I am a White Dominican." But then like I know a lot of Puerto Ricans, and some will say "Are you Puerto Rican?" I'm like "No." So all they see is Dominicans are darkskinned, or, you know, not as light as me.
Note that Lourdes' interpretation of race is very different from the so-called one-drop rule of hypo-descent in the United States, where persons across a range of phenotypes and racial mixing are typically classified as "black" and have faced the stigma attached to being black. This exists despite evidence from the historical record that some individuals have successfully passed as whites (Davis 1991).
In the United States, my respondents reported, sometimes with amusement, it was often difficult for others to assign them racially and ethnically. Depending on their phenotype, eye color, and hair texture, most of my respondents have been mistaken for being another ethnicity or race, such as Middle Eastern, Indian, Greek, Italian, and black (African American). According to my Dominican respondents, the common image of a Latino in the United States was someone who was dark-skinned and short. The concept of someone having fair skin, green eyes, and a tall frame, as Nora did, fell outside that image, as she herself noted. Nora felt that her coloring often netted her better treatment than her darker-complexioned Latino friends and relatives. It was something she was ambivalent about, because she seemed to be profiting from a system that unfairly penalized her co- and panethnics. Thus, when asked if she thought Latinos had the same opportunities as members of other groups, such as whites, blacks, and Asian Americans, Nora replied: "Well, I think that for me, I think everything

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

386 V. Louie
is just going to be ok, because since I don't look Black, or since I really don't look Spanish, I--I'm kind of a neutral, don't you think?"
As my respondents observed, the popular image of Latinos in the United States went beyond physical characteristics. Just as my Chinese respondents had to negotiate the stereotypes of Asian Americans as academic achievers, so my Dominican interviewees reported having to navigate the stigma attached to Latinos as underachievers. Thus, Mary remarked: "There is a problem in the U.S. in that Hispanics are portrayed constantly as the lower class, are uneducated or they are challenged. And there are a lot of Hispanics not challenged and are not poor and that are very educated." Other respondents spoke of the association of Latinos, and Dominicans in particular, with crime, violence, and the drug trade. Similar to the Chinese respondents, such external images had to be managed internally on the part of my Dominican interviewees (C. Suarez-Orozco and M. Suarez-Orozco 2001). Betty acknowledged changes in this image, as Latinos have become associated with hipness; nonetheless, she said the historical images of them as drug dealers and welfare recipients still existed, and had negative effects on how Latinos viewed themselves, in effect placing limits on what they thought they could achieve. In Betty's words: "I think it influences the way some people feel about themselves unless they have somebody else to show them differently."
Gender was another domain in which my Dominican respondents brought to bear their ethnic and transnational orientations. Similar to the Chinese, my Dominican respondents, male and female, tended to be aware of mainstream images of Latino men as macho and violent, and Latinas as alternatively hyper-sexual, "little Lolitas" or just the nameless, faceless women who cleaned hotel rooms. However, because my Dominican respondents had transnational orientations, and interacted with fellow second-generation co-ethnics similarly transnational in outlook, they also had to negotiate additional gendered images related to the back-and-forth movements within their social field. This was particularly relevant to the lives of my female respondents, who spoke of the expectations of Dominican male acquaintances, as grounded back there. Thus, one woman voiced with exasperation her exchange with one young man, who said he did not even know why she and other Dominican women were in college, because they were all going to be "pregnant," rather than working in paid employment outside the home. Further, according to this young man, the best employment available to women was secretarial work. Some women complained of the transnational movements maintaining other unattractive attitudes such as the social acceptance of infidelity on the part of men.

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

387

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

Consistent with the literature on immigrant transnationalism among Dominicans, Lenore observed the need of returning immigrants to highlight their wealth and status (Guarnizo 1994). She said: "It's like, who are you impressing? It just makes me mad. I'm not that much better of a person just because I'm here and you're there. And I don't feel the need to go over and show off everything I have just so everyone can say, oh, she's from New York." Lenore further pointed out the gendered aspects of using fashion to highlight this status. For the men, the typical attire was jeans, dress shoes, and multiple gold chains. For the women, it was "these tight outfits that they should not be wearing, high heels, and all these hairdos." She expressed exasperation with such expressions of Dominican femininity: "You're going on a plane. Like, I walk on a plane in sweat pants and a T-shirt and sneakers. Because I'm lugging around luggage. It's a long ride. I'm the biggest bum over there you ever met."
Conclusion
Although both the Dominican and Chinese families sought to include their children in the homeland imaginary they were engaged in, the results were quite different due to variation in family practices, and incorporation of the families into the respective transnational social fields. Because of the generational gap in the Chinese families, as influenced by the authoritarian model of parenting, and the language barrier, my respondents felt themselves to be occupying a separate, generationally bounded space, both in the home life that their immigrant parents created, and in the enclaves themselves. This sense of foreignness to the traditions of their parents, and the immigrant generation broadly speaking was reinforced by the relative infrequent number and nature of trips made by my respondents to the ancestral homeland. Overall, transnational attachments and orientations were relatively absent among my Chinese respondents. My Dominican respondents had a different experience. Growing up in families and communities characterized by relative openness of communication across generations, more successful ethnic language maintenance, and frequent back-and-forth movements for individuals, regardless of social class, my Dominican interviewees reported a strong sense of belonging in two national contexts and the consequent use of a dual frame of reference. In both cases, the school context, particularly college, was important as a venue for learning about their ancestral country of origin and the ethnic communities in which they were embedded in the United States.
The experiences of my respondents were consistent with Vickerman's (2002) insight, namely, that growing up in an ethnic enclave

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

388 V. Louie
does not necessarily mean that a member of the second generation will have transnational orientations and/or attachments. It is important to investigate the class character of transnationalism in the ethnic enclaves, and relatedly, how members of the second generation are situated therein. In the Chinese case, the families of my respondents were not from the privileged strata of holders of transnational wealth, who have played a vital role in large-scale real estate and manufacturing investments in the Chinese enclaves of New York City. Rather, their parents were the workers in the enterprises fueled by such transnational wealth, and while engaging in ancestor worship, remittances, and use of the ethnic media, they did not have the leisure or financial resources to lead back-and-forth lives. This was in contrast to the situation in Washington Heights and other Dominican enclaves in the Northeast. Here, the Dominican immigrants, across a wider socioeconomic spectrum, were back-and-forth travelers and investors fueling the less developed economy of the Dominican Republic through remittances, the purchase of second homes, and small-scale business ventures. The parents of my Dominican respondents were players in this dynamic.
In sum, although my Chinese respondents called themselves Chinese, they were referring to an ethnic- and class-specific identity in the United States. They took pains to distinguish themselves from immigrants, including more recently arrived young adults closer to them in age to the generation of their parents and beyond, and called attention to their interactions with other racial and ethnic groups in the United States. Although understanding that they were not living in the Dominican Republic full-time, my Dominican respondents nonetheless did view themselves as similar with the people there across ages, and with the immigrant generation in the United States.
Their status as members of ethnic and pan-ethnic groups in the United States was relevant to my respondents' identities, as they found themselves negotiating mainstream expectations of their respective groups. For the Chinese, it was the gender-neutral image of Asian Americans as model minorities, and gender-specific images that obscured the presence of the Asian male and associated the Asian female with prostitution. For the Dominicans, it was the genderneutral image of Latinos as academic underachievers associated with crime, poverty, and drugs. There were also gendered images of the Latin male as the incarnation of machoism, and the Latin female as hyper-sexualized. However, because the Dominicans used transnational orientations, my respondents also drew on Dominican conceptions of race to understand how they were incorporated into the American racial system, and to navigate social expectations for women and men.

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

389

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

Given the diversity of post-1965 immigration to the United States, additional comparative studies are necessary to explore how and why certain second-generation groups have transnational and ethnic orientations, and others do not, and the implications for their identities. To build on the findings of this article, it is important to consider secondgeneration individuals, who did not make the transition to college and did not grow up in a transnational social field, and who come from families with greater socio-economic resources. For example, would the experiences among the children of Chinese brokers of transnational wealth have been different? Furthermore, the data strategies in this article were cross-sectional in nature. As Levitt (2002) and Smith (2002) have proposed, a life course approach would highlight complexities not available to cross-sectional interviews. Studies that address such questions in the future would further complicate our understandings of transnationalism and ethnicity in the identities of secondgeneration individuals.
Notes
Received 29 September 2004; accepted 8 November 2005.
The author gratefully acknowledges the insightful comments of Caroline Brettell, who offered encouragement, skillfully organized this volume, and kindly provided insightful editorial guidance to the author in how to meet the suggested word limit; editor Jonathan Hill; and two anonymous reviewers. The author is also grateful for the funding extended by the International Migration Program of the Social Science Research Council to both studies; the generous dissertation funding of the Chinese project from the National Science Foundation, Yale University, and the China Times Cultural Foundation. The author appreciates the generous support of a postdoctoral fellowship at the Harvard Graduate School of Education, and a faculty grant of the David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies at Harvard University, which gave the author the time and funds to conduct the Dominican and Colombian project.
Address correspondence to Vivian Louie, Assistant Professor, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Larsen 504, 14 Appian Way, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138. E-mail: louievi@gse.harvard.edu
1. I define the second generation as United States-born children of immigrants, and foreign-born children, who migrated to the United States by the age of twelve, and thus were largely educated and socialized here.
2. Depending on the unit of analysis (individuals, groups, organizations, local states), the particular characteristics of transnationalism can vary. The typology developed by Portes, Guarnizo and Landolt (1999) calls attention to levels of institutionalization (high and low) in the economic, political and sociocultural sectors. An example of low-level institutionalization in the economic sector would be immigrants who return to the homeland and form small businesses; in contrast, a type of high-level institutionalization would be "multinational investments in Third World countries"

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

390 V. Louie
(222). Itzigsohn et al. (1999), meanwhile, advance the concept of "broad transnationality," in which individuals may have relatively few engagements with the country of origin in terms of trips and institutionalization, but nonetheless employ "both countries as reference points" (323). 3. The CILS study is based in Miami, Florida, and San Diego, California, has followed respondents for more than ten years, and includes individuals from the following groups: Mexico, the Philippines, Vietnam, China, and several other Latin American and Asian countries. 4. The Project on the Second Generation in Metropolitan New York focuses on adults, aged eighteen to thirty-two, who are either native-born (whites, African Americans, and Puerto Ricans) or second generation (Dominicans, West Indians, Chinese, Russian Jews, Colombians, Ecuadorians, and Peruvians), who were born in the United States to parents who immigrated after 1965, or who were born abroad but who arrived in the United States by the age of twelve and grew up here. 5. The Immigration Act of 1965 opened immigration to people from all countries after discontinuing policies that had favored Northern and Western Europeans, and restricted the immigration of Asians from the late nineteenth century onward, and of those from South, Central, and Eastern Europe starting in the early twentieth century (Foner 1987; Hing 1993). 6. Another transnational phenomenon resulting from the wealth of Asian nations during this time period are the so-called "parachute kids," described by Ong (1999) and Zhou (1998: 683) as "a highly select group of foreign students age eight to seventeen who have arrived in the United States, mostly from Asia, to seek a better education in American elementary or high schools." The children live in the United States on their own, typically under the supervision of a caretaker, while their parents shuttle back and from Asia to the United States, often managing transnational business ventures. 7. According to Waldinger (1986), this can be seen in how the two groups fared in the garment production industry. Following Puerto Ricans into neighborhoods and industries alike (and similarly discriminated against), Dominican migrant entrepreneurs tended to cluster into garment production. In the face of a decline in the American garment industry due to market forces during the late 1970s and early 1980s, Chinese entrepreneurs had the financial means to innovate accordingly, which their Dominican counterparts lacked the resources to do. 8. The two groups have also been incorporated in different ways, as reflected in United States Census data. In the years 1996-1999, the median income among Dominicans was $18,210, and 23.2 percent were on public assistance while 26.4 percent aged fifteen years and older had some college or more (Levitt 2001). Compare this with $63,000, the median family income among the Chinese in 2000, when 13 percent were living in poverty and 67 percent aged twenty-five to thirty-four years had some college or more (Xie and Goyette 2004). However, the Chinese American population in New York City, which was home to all my Chinese respondents, were not doing as well: 39 percent of adults twenty-five years and older had some form of postsecondary education, the median family income was $37,857, and 21 percent were living in poverty. 9. Research on the Dominicans was conducted in 2002-2004, and research on the Chinese in 1998-1999. 10. Otherwise, 69 percent of the Dominicans were born in the United States, and another 13 percent had arrived in the United States by the age of five. Amongst the Chinese, 55 percent were born in the United States, and nearly 28 percent had arrived by the age of 5.

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

391

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

11. Even if my Dominican respondents did not live in such a strongly transnational community, their parents were typically actors in a transnational field. By this, I mean the immigrant Dominican parents were engaged, in varying degrees, in the following activities: sending remittances back home, having secondary homes and/or binational businesses, frequently traveling back and forth, engaged in political activities, and maintaining Dominican cultural practices (language, media use).
12. Traditionally, the Chinese ideal family type is multigenerational, extending back to the ancestors and structured along a series of hierarchies: the collective over the individual, the elderly over the young, and men over women (Baker 1979).
13. I found this to be a class-specific phenomenon. For discussion of how suburban, middle-class Chinese American children understand relationships with their parents, please see Louie (2004).
References
Ahmed, Sara, Claudia Castaneda, Anne-Marie Fortier and Mimi Sheller 2003. Introduction: Uprootings/regroundings: Questions of home and migration. In Uprootings/ Regroundings: Questions of Home and Migration. Sara Ahmed, Claudia Castaneda, Anne-Marie Fortier and Mimi Sheller, eds. Oxford: Berg Press. Pp. 1-22.
Bailey, Benjamin 2001. Dominican-American Ethnic/Racial Identities and Untied States Social Categories. International Migration Review 35 (3): 677-708.
Baker, H. D. R. 1979. Chinese Family and Kinship. New York: Columbia University Press.
Benton, Gregor 2003. Chinese Transnationalism in Britain: A Longer History. Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 10 (3): 347-375.
Cornell, Stephen and Douglas Hartmann 1998. Ethnicity and Race: Making Identities in A Changing World. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Davis, James 1991. Who Is Black? One Nation's Definition. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Duany, Jorge 1994a. Reconstructing racial identity: Ethnicity, color, and class among Dominicans in the United States and Puerto Rico. Latin American Perspectives, Issue 100, 25 (3): 147-172.
Duany, Jorge 1994b. Quisqueya on the Hudson: the Transnational Identity of Dominicans in Washington Heights. Dominican Research Monographs: The CUNY Dominican Studies Institute.
Erikson, Erik 1968. Identity, Youth, and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton. Espenshade, Thomas J. and Maryann Belanger 1997. U.S. public perceptions and reac-
tions to Mexican migration. In At the Crossroads: Mexican Migration and U.S. Policy. Frank D. Bean, Rodolfo O. De La Garza, Bryan R. Roberts, and Sidney Weintraub, eds. Lanham, MD and London: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. Pp. 227-262. Espiritu, Yen Le 1997. Asian American Women and Men. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Espiritu, Yen Le and Thom Tran 2002. "Viet Nam, Nu'oc Toi (Vietnam, My Country): Vietnamese Americans and transnationalism". In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 367-398. Foner, Nancy 1987. Introduction: New Immigrants and Changing Patterns in New York City. In New Immigrants in New York. Nancy Foner, ed. New York: Columbia University Press. Fong, Joe Chung 1996. Transnational newspapers: The making of the post-1965 globalized/localized San Gabriel Valley Chinese community. Amerasia Journal 22 (3): 65-77.

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

392 V. Louie
Fouron, Georges E. and Nina Glick Schiller 2002. The generation of identity: Redefining the second generation within a transnational social field. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 168-208.
Fukuyama, Francis 1994. Immigrants and family values. In Arguing Immigration: Are New Immigrants a Wealth of Diversity or a Crushing Burden? Nicolaus Mills, ed. New York: Touchstone. Pp. 151-168.
Glick Schiller, Nina 1999. Transmigrants and Nation-States: Something old and something new in U.S. Immigrant experience. In Handbook of International Migration: The American Experience. Charles Hirschman, Josh DeWind, and Philip Kasinitz, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 94-119.
Glick Schiller, Nina, Linda Basch, and Cristina Blanc-Szanton 1992. Transnationalism: A new analytic framework for understanding migration. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 645: 1-24.
Gordon, Milton 1964. Assimilation into American Life: The Role of Race, Religion and National Origins. New York: Oxford University Press.
Grasmuck, Sherri and Ramon Grosfoguel 1997. Geopolitics, economic niches, and gendered social capital among recent Caribbean immigrants in New York City. Sociological Perspectives 40 (3): 339-364.
Grasmuck, Sherri and Patricia Pessar 1991. Between Two Islands: Dominican International Migration. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Guarnizo, Luis E. 1994. Los Dominicanyorks: The making of a binational society. The Annals of the American Academy 533: 70-86.
Guarnizo, Luis E. 1998a. The locations of transnationalism. Comparative Urban and Community Research 6: 3-34.
Guarnizo, Luis E. 1998b. The rise of transnational social formations: Mexican and Dominican State responses to transnational migration. Political Power and Social Theory 12: 45-94.
Hing, Bill Ong 1993. Making and Remaking Asian America through Immigration Policy, 1850-1990. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hsu, Madeline Y. 2000. Dreaming of Gold, Dreaming of Home: Transnationalism and Migration Between the United States and South China, 1882-1943. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hunter College Undergraduate Catalogue, 1995-1998 [1995]. New York: Office of the Provost, Hunter College.
Itzigsohn, Jose, Carlos Dore Cabral, Esther Hernandez Medina, and Obed Vazquez 1999. Mapping Dominican transnationalism: Narrow and broad transnational practices. Ethnic and Racial Studies 22 (2): 316-339.
Jones-Correa, Michael 2002. The study of transnationalism among the children of immigrants: Where we are and where we should be headed. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 221-241.
Kasinitz, Philip, John H. Mollenkopf, and Mary C. Waters 2004. Worlds of the second generation. In Becoming New Yorkers. Philip Kasinitz, John H. Mollenkopf, and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 1-20.
Kasinitz, Philip, Mary C. Waters, John H. Mollenkopf, and Merih Anil 2002. Transnationalism and the children of immigrants in contemporary New York. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 96-122.
Kibria, Nazli 2002. Of blood, belonging, and homeland trips: Transnationalism and identity among second generation Chinese and Koreans. In The Changing Face of

Second-Generation Chinese and Dominicans

393

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 295-311. Levitt, Peggy 2001. The Transnational Villagers. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Levitt, Peggy 2002. The ties that change: Relations to the ancestral home over the life cycle. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 123-144. Levitt, Peggy, Josh DeWind, and Steven Vertovec 2003. International perspectives on transnational migration: An introduction. International Migration Review 37 (3): 565-575. Lin, Jan 1995. Polarized development and urban change in New York's Chinatown. Urban Affairs Review 30 (3): 332-354. Lin, Jan 1998. Reconstructing Chinatown: Ethnic Enclave, Global Change. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Louie, Andrea 2001. Crafting places through mobility: Chinese American "roots-searching" in China. Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 8 (3): 343-380. Louie, Vivian 2003. "Becoming" and "being" Chinese American in college: A look at ethnicity, social class, and neighborhood in identity development. In Immigrant Life in the U.S.: Multi-disciplinary Perspectives. Donna R. Gabaccia and Colin Wayne Leach, eds. New York: Routledge. Pp. 113-129. Louie, Vivian 2004. Compelled to Excel: Immigration, Education and Opportunity Among Chinese Americans. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Ong, Aihwa 1999. Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of Transnationality. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Ong, Paul and Karen Umemoto 2000. Life and work in the inner city. In Contemporary Asian America: A Multidisciplinary Reader. Min Zhou and James V. Gatewood, eds. New York: New York University Press. Portes, Alejandro 2003. Conclusion: Theoretical convergencies and empirical evidence in the study of immigrant transnationalism. International Migration Review 37 (3): 875-892. Portes, Alejandro and Ramon Grosfoguel 1994. Caribbean Diasporas: Migration and ethnic communities. Annals, American Academy of Political and Social Science 533: 48-69. Portes, Alejandro, Luis E. Guarnizo, and Patricia Landolt 1999. The study of transnationalism: pitfalls and promise of an emergent research field. Ethnic and Racial Studies 22 (2): 218-237. Portes, Alejandro and Ruben Rumbaut 2001. Legacies: The Story of the Immigrant Second Generation. Berkeley and New York: University of California Press and Russell Sage Foundation. Rumbaut, Ruben 1997. Ties that bind: Immigration and immigrant families in the United States. In Immigration and the Family: Research and Policy on U.S. Immigrants. Alan Booth, Ann C. Crouter, and Nancy Landale, eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Pp. 3-46. Rumbaut, Ruben 2002. Severed or sustained attachments? Language, identity, and imagined communities in the post-immigrant generation. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 43-95. Sachs, Susan 1999. Advocates for immigrant students protest New English exam. New York Times, 18 June, Metropolitan Section, B1. Smart, Alan and Josephine Smart 1998. Transnational social networks and negotiated identities in interactions between Hong Kong and China. Comparative Urban and Community Research 6: 103-129.

Downloaded by [Rutgers University] at 13:50 02 March 2016

394 V. Louie
Smith, Robert C. 2002. Life course, generation, and social location as factors shaping second-generation transnational life. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 145-167.
Suarez-Orozco, Carola and Marcelo Suarez-Orozco 2001. Children of Immigration. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sung, Betty Lee 1987. The Adjustment Experience of Chinese Immigrant Children in New York City. New York: Center for Migration Studies.
Torres-Saillant, Silvio 1998. The tribulations of blackness: Stages in Dominican racial identity. Latin American Perspectives, Issue 100, 25 (3): 126-146.
Tuan, Mia 1998. Forever Foreigners or Honorary Whites: The Asian Ethnic Experience Today. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Vickerman, Milton 2002. Second-generation West Indian transnationalism. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 341-366.
Waldinger, Roger 1986. Through the Eye of the Needle: Immigrants and Enterprise in New York's Garment Trades. New York: New York University Press.
Wallin, Denise, Michael Schill and Glynis Daniels 2002. State of New York City's Housing and Neighborhoods 2002. Report of the Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy. New York University School of Law.
Waters, Mary C. 1990. Ethnic Options: Choosing Identities in America. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wolf, Diane L. 2002. There's No Place Like "Home": Emotional transnationalism and the struggles of second-generation Filipinos. In The Changing Face of Home: The Transnational Lives of the Second Generation. Peggy Levitt and Mary C. Waters, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Pp. 255-294.
Xie, Yu and Kimberly Goyette 2004. Demographic Portrait of Asian Americans. Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, October 2004.
Zhou, Min 1992. Chinatown: The Socioeconomic Potential of an Urban Enclave. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Zhou, Min 1998. Parachute kids' in Southern California: The educational experience of Chinese children in transnational families. Educational Policy 12 (6): 682-704.
Zhou, Min and Guoxian Cai 2002. Chinese language media in the United States: Immigration and assimilation in American life. Qualitative Sociology 25 (3): 419-440.

