Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Journal of Consumer Marketing
Acculturation and direct purchasing behavior among ethnic groups in the US: implications for business practitioners Victoria Seitz
Article information:
To cite this document: Victoria Seitz, (1998),"Acculturation and direct purchasing behavior among ethnic groups in the US: implications for business practitioners", Journal of Consumer Marketing, Vol. 15 Iss 1 pp. 23 - 31 Permanent link to this document: http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/07363769810202655 Downloaded on: 27 February 2016, At: 16:48 (PT) References: this document contains references to 15 other documents. To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 1480 times since 2006*
Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:
Ahmad Jamal, (2003),"Marketing in a multicultural world: The interplay of marketing, ethnicity and consumption", European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 37 Iss 11/12 pp. 1599-1620 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03090560310495375 Frederick A. Palumbo, Ira Teich, (2004),"Market segmentation based on level of acculturation", Marketing Intelligence &amp; Planning, Vol. 22 Iss 4 pp. 472-484 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/02634500410542761 Ayantunji Gbadamosi, (2012),"Acculturation: An exploratory study of clothing consumption among Black African women in London (UK)", Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal, Vol. 16 Iss 1 pp. 5-20 http:// dx.doi.org/10.1108/13612021211203005
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:274174 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services. Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

An executive summary for managers and executives can be found at the end of this article

Acculturation and direct purchasing behavior among ethnic groups in the US: implications for business practitioners
Victoria Seitz
Professor of Marketing, California State University, San Bernardino, California, USA

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Growing ethnic diversity Acculturation

Introduction The growth of direct marketing is a reflection of the changing lifestyles that exist in today's society. For example, the widespread use of credit cards, women working, longer commuting times to and from work, and the introduction of toll-free 800 numbers, are just some of the reasons for the increased use of direct marketing. As noted by Berman and Evans (1992), since consumers' lifestyles will continue to be time impoverished and if previous direct shopping experiences have been satisfactory, direct sales are expected to be strong and grow in the years to come.
As this form of marketing continues to prove fruitful as a business venture, competition will continue to be intense. Moreover, with marketers continually playing one-upmanship with one another, challenges will continue to be forthcoming. One major challenge is the growing ethnic diversity of the US market. Projections for the year 2000 estimate that one of every three Americans will be of ethnic origin (Wilson, 1992). In fact, the three leading US minority segments - Asians, Hispanics, and African Americans, currently make up approximately a $300 billion market (Holiday, 1993). Moreover, the Asian and Hispanic markets are growing by leaps and bounds. According to Santoro (1991), the Hispanic market is 25 million strong and growing six and a half times faster than the general market. The Asian market is also a rapidly growing group of highly educated individuals. In California, their population approximates 13 percent of the state's population or 4.5 million people (Fost, 1990). However, even given these startling statistics, marketers have, in general, skimped on marketing to these groups simply because they don't know how to communicate to these audiences. Only recently has Coca-Cola budgeted $10 million to market their products to the Hispanic market along with Maxwell House (Stern, 1984). As well, Cherry Creek Mall in Denver translated an existing advertising campaign into Spanish and Japanese due to a sizeable percentage of these ethnic groups that were present in their target market (Antuana, 1994).
It has often been assumed by marketers that in America "one does as Americans do" when it comes to marketing to ethnic groups. However, as time has shown, new arrivals in the US vary regarding their acculturation of American ways. Acculturation has been defined as the process of acquiring the customs of an alternative society. Therefore, the question remains, how to reach the growing Hispanic and Asian populations as they begin their new lives in the US.
Regarding direct response purchasing, Hispanics and Asians are receptive to this buying method. In fact, both Columbia House and Sears Roebuck & Co. have plans for a national rollout to the Hispanic market this year (Abel,

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998, pp. 23-31 (c) MCB UNIVERSITY PRESS, 0736-3761

23

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

The influence of acculturation and ethnicity
Experiential benefits
24

1993). Moreover, Sears plans to tap into the Asian market with advertising and promotions directed at this group (Advertising Age, 1994). AT&T found that direct mail pieces written in Spanish gained higher responses from Hispanics than when written in English. Moreover, other phone companies such as MCI and Sprint have achieved success in direct mail efforts directed to Hispanics because this group has relatives in distant places (Abel, 1993). But how successful are direct marketing strategies in gaining patronage to self-image projective products such as clothing, perfumes and grooming items among Hispanics, blacks and Asians?
This study focuses on the concerns of marketers and advertisers regarding the influence of acculturation and ethnicity on direct purchasing behavior. Specifically, the purpose of the study was to determine the influence of acculturation among Hispanic, Asian, and black communities to US customs and resulting practices regarding direct response purchasing behavior of selfimage projective products. The objectives of the study were to:
(1) Determine the degree of acculturation among Hispanic, Asian and black students in the US
(2) Determine attitudes toward direct marketing purchasing behavior
(3) Determine past direct shopping experiences
(4) Determine intention to respond to direct response advertisements of selfimage projective products
(5) Determine the influence of acculturation on intention to respond to selected direct response advertisements of self-image products
(6) Determine the influence of acculturation on attitudes toward direct marketing
(7) Compare attitudes toward direct marketing and intention to respond among Hispanics, blacks, Asians and whites.
This study examined advertisements of a specific group of products considered "self-image projective products": perfumes, cosmetics and apparel. These products, according to Seitz and Johar (1993), offer a mix of symbolic, functional, and experiential benefits to consumers.
Hence, based on the theory of acculturation, the following hypotheses were tested:
H1: The degree of acculturation will differ significantly by ethnicity
H2: Acculturating individuals will differ from individuals in the culture of residence (United States) in their attitudes toward direct marketing
H3: Acculturating individuals will differ from individuals in the culture of residence in their intention to respond to direct response advertisements of self-image products
Methodology Sample The sample consisted of students attending a western state university. The sample ranged in age between 18 to 34 years of age. Most respondents were single without children living at their rented residence. Annual reported family income ranged primarily between $5,000 to $35,000 and although the sample consisted of students, approximately 51 percent were employed full or part time. Fifty percent of the respondents were Asian or Pacific Islander followed by 34 percent white, seven percent black and four percent Hispanic. On further analysis, only in the case of employment was their a
JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Measuring attitudes
Measuring intention to respond

noticeable difference among ethnic groups regarding various demographic characteristics. Whites were more likely to be employed part time where Asians were more likely to be full-time students only.
Instrument A self-administered questionnaire was designed to assess the following information:
(1) degree of acculturation;
(2) attitudes toward direct marketing;
(3) direct purchasing experience;
(4) intention to respond; and
(5) demographic information.
To measure the degree of acculturation, the instrument developed by Lee (1993) was used. The instrument examined the use of English as opposed to the use of a native language in various situations like home, when shopping, as well as neighborhood composition, music preference, length of time in the US, and TV and show preference. Items measured used a combination of interval and nominal scales that were subsequently summed into a single score. The higher the score the greater the degree of acculturation of the individual. Cronbach's Alpha was employed to determine the reliability of the instrument. After the deletion of two scale items the scale's reliability equalled 0.73.
To measure attitudes toward direct marketing, the instrument developed by Akhter and Durvasula (1991) was used. The instrument consisted of three sub-scales designed to measure attitudes toward direct marketers in general, buying from catalogs, and buying from direct mail. Items were measured on a Likert scale ranging from one (strongly disagree) to five (strongly agree). The scales were measured for reliability using Cronbach's Alpha. Some items were deleted due to their lack of reliability on the scale. The direct marketing scale consisted of four items with a reliability coefficient of 0.74. Since the reliability for the catalog scale was low (0.38) this scale was withdrawn from further study. The direct mail scale consisted of five items with a reliability coefficient of 0.74. Direct marketing purchasing experience was solicited through questions regarding products purchased, amount spent in the past year, and recency of the respondent's last direct marketing purchases.
To measure intention to respond to direct response print ads of self-image products a modified version of the instrument developed by Dillon et al., (1990) was used. This single-item scale used a Likert scale to collect interval data regarding intention to respond to a direct response advertisement of a self-image projective product.
Stimuli used to assess intention to respond were three print direct response advertisements of self-image products collected from selected magazines. The first advertisement was an offer for a Rolling Stone magazine T-shirt. The ad, which showed three varieties of T-shirts, provided information for the individual to select a style and size for the T-shirt desired as well as the address, cost and shipping charges. The second advertisement was for the perfume Champagne by Yves St. Laurent and included a 1-800 number to order. Only the product was shown and price and other ordering information was not given. The third advertisement was for a gift pack of Rembrandt toothpaste and mouthwash. The advertisement provided the cost and gave a

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

25

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Catalogs and direct mail Analysis of variance

toll-free number to order the item. Finally, demographic information was based on the literature reviewed.
Results The sample totaled 70. As mentioned previously, whites and Asians comprised 84 percent of the sample. Seven percent of the sample were black and 4.3 percent were Hispanic. Scores for the scale regarding direct marketers ranged from seven to 18 with a mean score of 12.3. Scores on the direct mail scale ranged from seven to 25 with a mean of 16.6. Scores on the acculturation scale ranged from 35 to 69 with a mean score of 56.8 suggesting a high degree of acculturation into US culture among all respondents.
Regarding purchases made from a catalog or direct mail, 21.4 percent had not made a purchase; however, 50 percent had made one to two purchases in the past year. Sixty-four percent of the respondents had not purchased an item through a TV offer and 50 percent had not made a purchase through a magazine offer. For those that had made a purchase, the majority of these respondents (51 percent) made the purchase six months or more ago. Only 10 percent had made a purchase in the past week. Of the purchases made, women's apparel (30 percent), records (30 percent) and magazines (22.9 percent) were among the most commonly cited products. Finally, regarding the amount spent on direct marketing purchases, 31.4 percent spent between $100 to $199 during the past year. Twenty percent spent between $1 and $49 dollars on such purchases.
Regarding intention to respond to the direct response advertisement of the Rolling Stone T-shirt offer, most respondents (43.8 percent) noted that they definitely would not consider ordering the product from the ad. Regarding the advertisement for Champagne perfume, responses were more spread out with 28.8 percent open to considering ordering this product from the ad. In the third advertisement for the Rembrandt gift pack, again the responses were more spread out with the majority (33.9 percent) of respondents noting that they would not consider ordering the product from the ad.
Hypothesis testing
H1: The degree of acculturation will differ significantly by ethnicity.
To test this hypothesis Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used. Results were significant at p < 0.001 (F = 15.3, DF 3) Findings showed that Asians were least acculturated to the US culture with a mean score of 53. Blacks were the most acculturated next to whites with a mean of 59.40 compared to 61.79 for whites. Hispanics were less acculturated than blacks but more than Asians with a mean acculturation score of 54.33.
Hypotheses 2 and 3 were not significant.
Conclusion and implications This study was exploratory in nature and is limited to the sample surveyed. Findings showed that for self-image products, receptiveness to purchasing via direct response advertisements in magazines was limited. Further, findings did show that each ethnic group surveyed acculturated to the US culture to varying degrees. Asians tended to be the least acculturated to US customs. This may be due to the fact that most Asians surveyed did not work and were full-time students, suggesting that they are perhaps here in the US for study only and plan to return to their homeland upon graduation and,

26 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Marketers need to become educated
Difference races and cultures

hence, have no motivation to assimilate into American society. Hispanics also tended to have a low degree of acculturation compared to whites. This may be attributed to the nature of the Hispanic student population. Although not asked specifically on the questionnaire, Hispanics surveyed in this study may have been the first generation to attend college in their family, suggesting still close ties with their culture.
Findings showed that the most commonly purchased items were women's apparel, records and magazines, yet respondents definitely would not consider purchasing the T-shirt advertised. Apparently, clothing is a highly personal product that projects individuals' personalities. For perfumes, respondents were open to purchasing the product from the advertisement. Although not examined, this may have been due to the reputation of the designer who created it. With the "Rembrandt" gift pack, again, respondents were not receptive to purchasing this product with the information given in the ad. Most respondents noted that not enough information was given and that a dentist's recommendation or an endorsement by the American Dental Association may have reduced the risk with purchasing this product from the advertisement.
Implications from this study are several. Findings suggest that peoples' from varying cultures living in the US do not necessarily assimilate into the American culture to the same degree. Evidence shows that marketers need to become educated regarding the purchasing habits of different ethnic cultures and not assume that because people are living in the US that they have adapted to this culture. Findings showed that Asians were least acculturated to the US culture compared with other ethnic groups. Although this was a student sample, findings showed that marketers need to reach targeted groups using media vehicles that ethnic groups are familiar with and use such as ethnic-based Yellow Pages, radio and TV stations. Further, it is important to reach Hispanic or Asian markets using their language. For many Hispanics and Asians, their native tongue is spoken at home and with friends, although they live in a neighborhood that has many different cultures, listen to American music, go to American movies and watch American television programs. Particularly for the Asian market, there are a wide variety of cultures bound under the Asian name such as Korean, Taiwanese, Japanese, and Vietnamese that consider themselves to be very different from their Asian partners. Marketers need to recognize their differences as well as their commonalities when developing strategies and advertisements. Given the growth of ethnic communities throughout the US, marketers have a great opportunity to communicate their message through a growing number of Hispanic and Asian television and music stations as well as newspapers across the country.
Moreover, given this sensitivity to one's culture, advertisers need to address the visual aspects of their ads through the models used and the copy. For example, would blacks feel comfortable buying a toothpaste that puts the emphasis on white with a white model and the word "white" used throughout the copy? If advertisers are going to market to a target that includes different races and cultures through mainstream advertising vehicles, then their advertising must reflect this sensitivity. Cagley and Cardozo (1970) found that whites were less likely to identify with a product if a black model was present. Although their study only dealt with whites, marketers need to be sensitive to the diversity of the US population in their advertising.

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

27

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Self-image type products
More localized approaches

In addition, marketers should create advertising messages that show these ethnic groups in a positive light. Rather than showing a white couple preparing for retirement, it is important to note that ethnic minorities are also growing in terms of discretionary income available and are able to celebrate the so-called "fruits of their labor" with luxury cars, retirement plans, investment spending and other products that have previously been confined to affluent whites.
Further, findings showed that all individuals, irrespective of ethnic background, still prefer to purchase the majority of self-image type products in stores. Marketers can overcome indecision by providing more information in their advertisements, such as price as in the perfume advertisement or an endorsement by a reputable association or spokesperson as in the toothpaste ad. It seems that clothing will always be a hit or miss item because of the personal nature of the product and the social ramifications of the purchase (Seitz and Johar, 1993). Perhaps advertisers can offer a minicatalog in the print advertisement as opposed to a single or dual item offering.
Finally, given the growing multi-ethnicity in the US, marketers may fare better by adapting the principles of global advertising and marketing. As found by Seitz (1995), some products lend themselves to a globalized strategy while others suggest a more localized approach. By understanding the target market, marketers can adapt current direct marketing strategies to selected ethnic groups with only minor changes, such as the copy written in the targeted market's language. However, if directing a campaign to less acculturated groups, then a more localized approach would be needed, e.g. changes in catalog, product and price and changes in promotional strategies, may enhance direct marketing purchases.
Seitz and Johar (1993) found that some types of products lend themselves to globalized campaigns while others profit from more localized approaches. In their study they found that clothing products benefited from a localized approach while perfumes profited from a globalized approach. Clothing is seen as a personal reflection of oneself and of one's culture, which can vary widely even within the US; perfumes, on the other hand, require little copy to sell the product and are primarily image driven for all women, suggesting that a globalized approach may enhance purchases. In addition, brands such as Levi and Coca-Cola, well known throughout the world, could incorporate a more globalized campaign to ethnic groups in the US with much success. Other product categories such as cosmetics, although well known throughout the world, may require copy changes to explain features and benefits. With these types of products the copy may be translated and perhaps given different emphasis depending on the needs of the target market.
Direct marketing is growing in popularity overseas as well as on the Internet and through cable television. Individuals that utilize these vehicles will find it easy to adapt to US culture. However, such technological advances are in their infancy overseas and, hence, ethnic groups living in the US (and depending on their length of stay), may take more time to adapt to media and purchasing vehicles available in the US. In the meantime, marketers would fare well to adapt the principles of globalized and localized campaign strategies when marketing to ethnic groups in the US.
Future research Future research into the direct purchasing habits of different ethnic groups might include focus groups and personal interviews as well as surveys. In addition, future research might focus on fine tuning the acculturation scale

28 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

Broader range

developed by Lee (1993). For example, the scale did not include such items as eating habits, reading and speaking ability in a language. Further, when developing surveys and instruments to research different ethnic backgrounds, the researcher must develop separate surveys as well as provide both an English version and a version in a person's first language for their choosing.
Future research needs to include a larger sample. The current study did not have equal numbers in each group which may have influenced results. Moreover, future research should examine intention to respond to a broader range of products. This research only dealt with selected products that are considered self-image products. More research into products and services commonly purchased through the mail or via direct response advertisements will need to be undertaken.
References
Abel, J. (1993), "Marketing to Hispanics", Direct, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 36-9.
Advertising Age (1994), "Sears targets Asians", 10 October.
Akhter, S.H. and Durvasula, S. (1991), "Consumers' attitude toward direct marketing and purchase intentions", Journal of Direct Marketing, Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 48-56.
Antuana, I.R. (1994), "Cherry Creek mall goes western: new ads contrast cowboy tradition with Denver today", 24 March, The Denver Post, C-01.
Berman, B. and Evans, J.R. (1992), Retail Management: A Strategic Approach (5th ed.), Macmillan, New York, NY.
Cagley, J. and Cardozo, R.N. (1970), "White response to integrated advertising", Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 35-9.
Dillon, W.R., Madden, T.J. and Firtie, N.H. (1990), Marketing Research in a Marketing Environment, Richard Irwin, Inc., Homewood, IL.
Fost, D. (1990), "California's Asian market", American Demographics, Vol. 12 No. 10, pp. 34-7.
Holliday, K. (1993 ), "Reaching ethnic markets", Bank Marketing, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 35-7.
Lee, W.-N. (1993), "Acculturation and advertising communication strategies: a cross-cultural study of Chinese and Americans", Psychology and Marketing, Vol. 10 No. 5, pp. 381-97.
Santoro, E. (1991), "Hispanics are hot", Direct Marketing, October, pp. 28-30.
Seitz, V.A. (1995), "Direct response advertising across Europe: a content analysis of selfimage projective products", Grant, K. and Walker, I. (Eds), World Marketing Congress, Academy of Marketing Science, pp. 110-15.
Seitz, V. and Johar, J.S. (1993), "Relative positioning of self-image projective products across Europe: a content analysis of print advertising", World Marketing Congress, VII, pp. 340-5.
Stern, A.L. (1984), "One language, four cultures", Marketing Communications, July, pp. 45-50; 52-3; 55.
Wilson, R. (1992), "Beyond black: color cosmetics for other ethnic groups", Drug & Cosmetic Industry, Vol. 151 No. 5, pp. 26-30.

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

29

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

This summary has been provided to allow managers and executives a rapid appreciation of the content of this article. Those with a particular interest in the topics covered may then read the article in toto to take advantage of the more comprehensive description of the research undertaken and its results to get the full benefit of the material present

Executive summary and implications for managers and executives
Cultural targeting: can marketers make it work? Immigrant and ethnic minority communities present a whole series of thorny issues for marketers. We must consider ethical questions, targeting issues and, as Seitz reports, the extent to which such groups integrate with the dominant culture of the host country. Although politics in many countries (and especially the USA) seems to drive towards immigration restrictions, the reality is that free trade and all its benefits require a greater degree of international mobility. This implies more immigration rather than less. Certainly, the pressures from Central America (for the US) and North Africa (for Europeans) suggest that immigration will stay at its high levels for some time.
This is not the place to comment on the political and social issues relating to that immigration "problem". Some people see immigrants as a drain on the indigenous economy (taking jobs, receiving benefits, filling up schools), while other argue that immigration provides the dynamic that makes the USA (especially) so successful. What we must consider is the reality that, as Seitz points out, "...one of every three Americans will be of ethnic origin."
Leaving aside the fact that we're all of ethnic origin, and will all be members in one respect or another of an "ethnic" minority, we must accept that immigrant communities seek to sustain their own culture while attempting to integrate into mainstream society. What Seitz discusses is the fact that some groups seem more successful in achieving this balance than others. We can look at European minorities (Italians, Irish, Jews, etc.) in the US and see a more integrated group than, for example, Hispanic immigrants from Mexico, Puerto Rico or Colombia. In recent times the Asian minority has grown and (as a perusal of recent publications in academic management journals will show) achieve a degree of economic and educational power yet to be achieved by other groups.
In every country there are successful and unsuccessful immigrant groups. This success follows from economic rather than political power. The political influence of Jews in the US flows from more than just numbers. It follows from economic success and the enormous contribution of Jews to American business. Acceptance comes from economic power rather than political influence.
In considering the marketing issues relating to ethnic and cultural minorities there are three questions to examine: the ethics of targeting ethnic minorities; the practicalities of such targeting; and how to incorporate cultural variation into marketing communications. Sietz's argument that direct marketing provides the most effective strategy must relate to each of these areas.
Targeting minorities: is it ethical? The answer to this question is difficult and, as is often the case, is both yes and no. When a drinks company targets low income blacks or a tobacco business immigrant Hispanics there must be serious concerns about ethics. But, at the same time, our communications must respect cultural and social differences in immigrant or minority communities. Careful consideration must be given to:
* Consulting the targeted minority before executing the strategy. Remember that one troublesome "community leader" can cause all sorts of problems.

30 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

* Involving "natives" of the community in the writing of copy. Effective targeting involves reference to the reasons for the choice of target. These must not offend.
* Assessing the heterogeneity of the target community especially in the degree of acculturation. Targeting "westernized" members of an ethnic group can prove dangerous if it offends the less integrated.
In many cases, ethnic targeting should be rejected since it contains pitfalls in terms of image for relatively little business advantage.
How practical is it to target minorities? Geographical concentration, language differences, religion or dress distinguishes most minorities. However, just because someone resides in a particular district, speaks a certain language and professes a particular faith, it does not automatically mean they share the predominant preferences, outlook or mores of the minority culture. Furthermore, there are ethical problems with using ethnic origin data as a targeting variable and certainly when direct mail is the medium.
If, however, we use ethnic media then there are fewer problems. After all, the magazine or radio station exists to serve the community and that community expects advertising that reflects the predominant culture. Once a response is received from, for example, a Spanish language magazine then we can with no fear of offence use that language for future communications.
For some groups targeting presents more of a challenge. Media abound that target black people. But that doesn't acknowledge the groups within that community - descendants of former slaves, immigrants from Africa or the Caribbean and people of mixed parentage. All are "black" but they do not necessarily face the same problems or subscribe to a coherent culture.
We should, therefore, treat our targeting with care, avoid stereotypical assumptions and respect variations within the usual ethnic definitions. Calling someone Asian in no way reflects a person's origins, language, religion or culture. And the same goes for black people and Hispanics. Using an acceptable, honorable message, carefully targeted to a defined minority can provide sales success. But targeting large groups purely on the basis of ethnicity is a recipe for disaster.
Does one size fit all? Cultural variation in marketing communications The basic rule here is to vary the cultural basis of your message only when you appreciate and understand the targeted culture. You are better off with a message designed for the majority culture (translated if necessary) than you are with a botched piece of "cultural targeting".
At the same time you must appreciate some key issues in adapting your message. Some cultures reject or dislike elements of majority culture. Muslims and orthodox Jews find the use of women in advertising problematic (as does the fundamentalist Christian community) and you should respect that in any communications. Your research will throw up examples of things to avoid as regards any minority culture.
Varying the message needs careful research, testing of the copy and the avoidance of risks. If you simply see ethnic targeting as a data issue you will, without doubt, fall down losing any of the benefits flowing from such targeting.

JOURNAL OF CONSUMER MARKETING, VOL. 15 NO. 1 1998

31

Downloaded by Rutgers University At 16:48 27 February 2016 (PT)

This article has been cited by:
1. Miguel Angel Zuniga, Ivonne M. Torres, Mihai Niculescu. 2015. Boundary conditions to the effect of fluency and comprehension on AAD when targeting Hispanics vs Whites with single meaning vs polysemous slogans. Journal of Consumer Marketing 32:3, 145-156. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
2. Helen McCormick, Jo Cartwright, Patsy Perry, Liz Barnes, Samantha Lynch, Gemma Ball. 2014. Fashion retailing - past, present and future. Textile Progress 46, 227-321. [CrossRef]
3. Joe Choon Yean Chai, Sally Dibb. 2014. How consumer acculturation influences interpersonal trust. Journal of Marketing Management 30, 60-89. [CrossRef]
4. Aypar Uslu, Beril Durmu, Sina Tademir. 2013. Word of Mouth, Brand Loyalty, Acculturation and the Turkish Ethnic Minority Group in Germany. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 99, 455-464. [CrossRef]
5. Joe Choon Yean Chai, Kenneth R. Deans, Sergio Biggemann. 2012. The influence of acculturation on consumer relational bonding in banking relationships. Journal of Strategic Marketing 20, 393-410. [CrossRef]
6. Rina Makgosa. 2012. Ethnic diversity in Britain: a stimulus for multicultural marketing. Marketing Intelligence & Planning 30:3, 358-378. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
7. Mariko Morimoto. 2012. The Influence of Acculturation and In-Group Bias on Source Credibility: The Case of Asian American Female Consumers. Journal of Promotion Management 18, 254-274. [CrossRef]
8. Ayantunji Gbadamosi. 2012. Acculturation. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal 16:1, 5-20. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
9. Liesl Riddle, Jennifer Brinkerhoff. 2011. Diaspora entrepreneurs as institutional change agents: The case of Thamel.com. International Business Review 20, 670-680. [CrossRef]
10. Catherine Sutton-Brady, Teresa Davis, Mary Jung. 2010. Perceived cultural spaces and cultural in-betweens: Consumption among Korean Australians. Journal of Consumer Behaviour 9:10.1002/cb.v9:5, 349-363. [CrossRef]
11. Lakshman Rajagopal, Tianshu Zheng, JuHee Kang, Ju Yup Lee. 2009. Influence of acculturation on dining-out behavior of Koreans living in the United States a an exploratory study. Journal of Foodservice 20:10.1111/fri.2009.20.issue-6, 321-329. [CrossRef]
12. Jeremy J. Sierra, Michael R. Hyman, Ivonne M. Torres. 2009. Using a Model's Apparent Ethnicity to Influence Viewer Responses to Print Ads: A Social Identity Theory Perspective. Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising 31, 41-66. [CrossRef]
13. Nizar Souiden, Mariam Diagne. 2009. Canadian and French men's consumption of cosmetics: a comparison of their attitudes and motivations. Journal of Consumer Marketing 26:2, 97-109. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
14. Ivonne M. Torres, Elten Briggs. 2007. Identification Effects on Advertising Response: The Moderating Role of Involvement. Journal of Advertising 36, 97-108. [CrossRef]
15. Ji-hyun Lee, Dong Il Lee, , . 2007.       . Journal of Global Academy of Marketing Science 17, 61-81. [CrossRef]
16. Rick T. Wilson. 2007. Acculturation and Discrimination in the Global Market Place. Journal of International Consumer Marketing 20, 67-78. [CrossRef]
17. Ramya Rajagopalan, Jeanne Heitmeyer. 2005. Ethnicity and consumer choice. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal 9:1, 83-105. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
18. Ogenyi E. Omar, Alan Hirst, Charles Blankson. 2004. Food Shopping Behavior Among Ethnic and Non-Ethnic Communities in Britain. Journal of Food Products Marketing 10, 39-57. [CrossRef]
19. Wilbur I. Smith, Charles L. Evans, Nanda R. Shrestha. 2004. The Civil Rights Movement and Social Sensitivity. Services Marketing Quarterly 26, 83-103. [CrossRef]

