Department of Economics
! !
! ! ! ! !
! !
An economic and rational choice approach to the autism spectrum and human neurodiversity
Tyler Cowen
George Mason University Department of Economics
Paper No. 11-58
!
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1975809

An economic and rational choice approach to the autism spectrum and human neurodiversity
Tyler Cowen Department of Economics George Mason University
December 20, 2011
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1975809

Abstract This paper considers an economic approach to autistic individuals, as a window for understanding autism, as a new and growing branch of neuroeconomics (how does behavior vary with neurology?), and as a foil for better understanding non-autistics and their cognitive biases. The relevant economic predictions for autistics involve greater specialization in production and consumption, lower price elasticities of supply and demand, a higher return from choosing features of their environment, less effective use of social focal points, and higher relative returns as economic growth and specialization proceed. There is also evidence that autistics are less subject to framing effects and more rational on the receiving end of ultimatum games. Considering autistics modifies some of the standard results from economic theories of the family and the economics of discrimination. Although there are likely more than seventy million autistic individuals worldwide, the topic has been understudied by economists. An economic approach also helps us see shortcomings in the "pure disorder" models of autism.
Keywords: Neuroeconomics, autism, neurodiversity, rational choice theory
2
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1975809

Neuroeconomics is one of the most innovative and fastest-growing areas of economic research (Camerer, Loewenstein, and Prelec 2005, Rustichini 2009, Glimcher, Camerer, Fehr, and Poldrack 2009, Bernheim 2009). In its most general sense, neuroeconomics means that economists broaden the standard model of utility maximization and consider human beings as economic agents with a neural system as a "multiple process" model.
While outside observers often associate neuroeconomics with neural imaging techniques, there are broader currents in neuroeconomic thought. In addition to measuring brain states through imaging, neuroeconomics can start with what scientists already know about cross-sectional variation in human neurologies. That is, we can consider atypical individuals whose brains are already known to be different, as discovered through testing and diagnosis. We then consider the testable implications of these neurological differences.1
A simple example would run as follows. In the literature on autism it is recognized that autistic individuals process information differently and have difficulty dealing with particular environments, such as many traditional workplaces, which are mostly designed by non-autistics. One immediate implication is that autistics should receive a higher return - whether monetary or psychic -- from working at home and working through online connections. A related prediction is that autistics are also more likely to be unemployed. That is a deliberately simple example but it illustrates another way of thinking about how neurology matters for economic behavior. A "neuroeconomics without brain scans" can be used to generate and examine more controversial propositions as well, as we shall see.
Epidemiology is controversial, but the autism spectrum alone has an estimated prevalence in the range of 1-100 to 1-165. At 1-100 there may well be close to 70 million autistics in the world and possibly many more. A country that size (or smaller) would be studied in
1 Hayek 1963 [1952] was one of the first works in neuroeconomics. Arguably Adam Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments can be considered a pioneering work in the field as well, as discussed by Cowen (2009b).
3

detail by economists, so why ignore autistics? Other neurological conditions include Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, Tourette syndrome, and Down syndrome.2 Again, while prevalence is debated, these concepts are relevant to the lives of many millions, including the families of these individuals. Furthermore many neurodiverse individuals are treated badly or subject to discrimination or otherwise experience bad outcomes and there is room for improvement. This is hardly an area where the presumption of current optimality reigns.
Studying neurodiverse individuals illustrates cross-sectional variation within the broader human condition and so it also offers a closer look at choice. The common tendency of behavioral economics is to find a bias and assume it holds across all or most individuals. An alternative approach seeks to explain when the bias is present or not and that requires a focus on human diversity, including neurodiversity. Some kinds of neurodiverse individuals show smaller cognitive biases in particular areas and that can help us identify which features of human decision-making underlie the biases.
To give an example, in one recent paper (De Martino et al. 2008) autistic individuals are asked to perform in a common economic experiment about the framing of monetary gains and losses. The typical result, which has been replicated many times with non-autistics, is that most people treat a risky outcome as more acceptable, compared to a sure thing, if the choices are described as possible losses rather than a consequentially equivalent gains point. The autistics, however, were less subject to these framing biases and overall they made more rationally neoclassical choices in the experiments. The autistics were able to assess outcomes more objectively and this differential performance may help us better understand why framing effects are so prevalent and so strong in non-autistics.3
2 For a more general neuroeconomics context for neurodiversity, see for instance Kishida, King-Casas, and Montague (2010). 3 In many clinical papers it is common practice (see Mottron, et al. 2008 for a critique) to assume that differential performance by neurodiverse individuals represents a shortcoming or a pathology; indeed De Martino et al. (2008) offer exactly this interpretation. Even in tasks where neurodiverse individuals perform with a noticeable superiority, their performance is sometimes redescribed as a cognitive deficit. An
4

We now see autism playing an explicit role in labor markets. For instance Danish entrepreneurs have recently started a firm Specialisterne, which employs autistics and Asperger's individuals and markets their services, often to high-tech firms. This is a forprofit venture and it stands behind the quality of their workers, especially when it comes to performing detailed tasks in information technology, such as writing software. The company certifies the productivity of the individual autistic worker and in essence the company is trying to profit from the market underpricing of autistic labor.
Finally, policy choices affect neurodiverse individuals, yet we have no systematic economic framework for analyzing these issues. Autism for instance currently plays a large role in health care policy and educational policy. These questions include whether we should require insurers to cover autism-related treatments, whether governments should subsidize particular autism treatments, whether autism should be considered an issue of health, education, or both, and whether genetic testing and selective abortion should be encouraged, discouraged, banned and so on. I will not provide systematic policy analysis in this paper but constructing an economic framework is a step in this direction.
The paper will proceed as follows. Section two will consider some of the methodological and normative questions behind how an economist might model or understand autism. Section three will consider the cognitive profile of autism, as it might be understood in a rational choice framework. Section four will consider some particular testable predictions about autism and the autism spectrum. Section five will consider some predictions about how autistics play economic games. Section six will examine the economics of discrimination as applied to autism. This treatment will differ from the emphases in much of the clinical and research literature, while remaining consistent with a subset of writings in those fields. In this sense an economic approach is revisionist but only mildly so. An economic framework should be seen as a complement to the best current research in these areas, not a substitute.
economic perspective, which starts with an advance definition of test success in terms of a rational model, is less likely to make this kind of presumption.
5

II. A neuroeconomics approach to human neurodiversity
An economic or rational choice approach to human neurodiversity starts by considering appropriate definitions and these definitions will differ from many (but not all) clinical approaches. In particular, economic approaches, which are foundational by their nature, can define neurological differences in terms of a cognitive profile rather than as a series of outcomes or impairments. Furthermore the cognitive profile should be construed in terms of "primitives" as much as possible and not defined at the level of overt behavior or by how a person fares in society. This is in accord with the general rational choice tendency to emphasize building blocks of models and to treat social outcomes as something to be explained or predicted, not as matters to be assumed in the initial definitions.4 Ex ante, at the moment of defining a neurological condition, the possible outcomes should be considered open and variable, and depending on empirics, rather than necessarily negative or positive.
To make this clearer, let's consider some definitions of autism, focusing on the difference between outcome-based definitions and cognitive definitions.
The standard definition of autism, as found in DSM-IV (the major diagnostic manual for the United States), identifies three major impairments, namely impairments in communication, impairments in social interactions, and restricted, repetitive and stereotyped behavior and interests. There is additional detail and gloss but our purposes that is sufficient. Under this definition, autism is a set of impairments. If an autistic person performs at above average levels at some task, such superior performance would seem to be accidental to autism or at variance with autism. The initial definition could be modified to allow for such superior performances and indeed such modifications are
4 On this point see Yoshida et al. (2010), who consider how social interaction stems from underlying cognitive and computational issues. On hormonal issues, see Andari et al. (2010).
6

offered, but still the initial definition negatively judges the performance of autistics, cognitively and otherwise.5
An alternative approach, favored by some autism researchers, is to define autism explicitly in terms of a cognitive profile. This approach is sometimes associated with Professor Laurent Mottron and his research laboratory at the University of Montreal but much of the extant research on autism can be recast in a cognitive profile framework, even if it isn't always presented as such. Furthermore the cognitive profile approach dates back to some of the earliest writings on autism, including from the autism research pioneers Leo Kanner and Hans Asperger.
A cognitive profile approach defines autism in terms of how autistic brains process information and how those methods differ from the information processing of nonautistic brains. The outcomes will depend on how autistic cognitive profiles interact with varying environments; or in terms of rational choice theory it will depend on solving for equilibrium. There is no definitional equivalence between autism and any particular set of outcomes.
When autistics demonstrate superior performance on some cognitive tests, such as pattern recognition, more objective encoding of certain kinds of memories, or pitch recognition, these skills should follow from the specified cognitive profile. Kanner and Asperger themselves stressed that a high variability of outcomes was to be expected from autistics and that many autistics were very successful in science, the arts, and other areas. That Paul Dirac and Alan Turing have plausibly been identified as displaying autistic cognitive profiles suggests that a pure "disorder" model is misleading; there is also evidence that
5 For two overviews of the literature on autism, see Volkmar, Paul, Klin, and Cohen (2005) and Bowler (2007). There is little on autism in economics. Camerer, Loewenstein, and Prelec (2005) offer a brief discussion of some autism-related issues. Thomas Sowell (1997, 2002) covers some issues related to the autism spectrum, especially with regard to "late talking," though not from an economic point of view.
7

mathematical talent is linked to autism and that autism is correlated with a higher socioeconomic status of the parents.6
The cognitive profile approach allows for a natural separation of the autistic brain and the environment in which that brain operates. The standard DSM definition of autism obscures this distinction, which to a rational choice theorist is fundamental, namely the difference between preferences/capabilities and external constraints. In other words, if we define autistics as failing, both autistic failures and successes will become harder to understand.7
In terms of the method of economics, the cognitive profile approach occupies an intermediate position between traditional and behavioral approaches. Standard textbook microeconomics uses "preferences" and "constraints" as fundamental categories, but behavioral economics goes one step further and asks how brains process information. I am melding the two approaches by asking what different modes of information processing might mean for preferences and constraints more generally.
In this approach, the DSM-IV definition of autism need not be rejected altogether. It is still possible to adhere to a DSM approach for practical fieldwork, and "autism identification," while rejecting it as our best possible understanding of autism. Under one
6 On Dirac, see Farmelo (2009). On the cognitive strengths of autism, see Dawson, Mottron, and Gernsbacher (2008). On the lesser susceptibility of autistics to some optical illusions, superior skills in spotting some kinds of patterns, cognitive strengths in attention and perception, including auditory perception, see Bowler (2007, chapters five and six). On autistics' strong performance on Ravens intelligence tests, see Dawson, Soulieres, Gernsbacher, and Mottron (2007). On mathematical talent, see Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Burtenshaw, and Hobson (2007). On coming from families with higher socioeconomic status, see Durkin, et al. (2010).
7 There is possible heterogeneity within autism. For instance there is a debate as to whether "Fragile X autism" counts as "true autism," since it shares some behavioral manifestations with autism but it does not share the same cognitive profile (Dissanayake, et al. 2008). The analysis of this paper probably does not apply to "Fragile X" cases or some other non-standard variants of autism, some or all of which may not be autism at all; see Moss and Howlin (2009).
8

view, DSM does not "define" autism but rather the DSM standards provide useful information for identifying autistics who require assistance. Alternatively, in the context of both insurance companies and schools, DSM standards allow payments to be triggered if an individual is judged to be autistic according to the specified criteria. For systems of financial transfer to prove workable, perhaps the relevant legal definitions have to cite unfavorable outcomes rather than defining autism in a more fundamental way. We'll return to this issue when we consider discrimination. For now the point is that the DSM standards don't have to be applied to every autism-relevant question and should not be viewed as necessarily trumping other approaches.
The DSM standards also evolve. DSM-III defined autism differently than did DSM-IV and DSM-V will differ as well. It's well known that the DSM process itself is, for better or worse, heavily influenced by various interest groups, including pharmaceutical lobbies. So DSM approaches have to be judged by some external standard and the cognitive profile approach (and a concomitant rational choice approach) can assist in this endeavor. Again, the DSM standard should not be construed as ruling out competing or more fundamental approaches.
As a first approximation, the autistic cognitive profile seems to fit Asperger individuals as well, even if there are other differences in terms of the neurodevelopmental path, such as in speech acquisition and its speed. The analysis therefore applies to the autism spectrum more generally, even if one wishes to uphold an autism/Asperger's distinction for other reasons; for purposes of exposition I am referring to autistics but "autism spectrum individuals" or "AS individuals" would be alternative possible terms.8
III. What exactly is the cognitive profile of autism?
8 It is widely understood that Asperger's is a form of autism, see for instance Campbell (2005) and Macintosh and Dissanaykae (2004); this understanding will likely be reflected in the forthcoming DSM-V.
9

While autistic brains process information differently than do non-autistic brains, the literature offers some varied and distinct understandings of what this might mean. Here are a few possibilities, not necessarily mutually exclusive:
1. Autistic brains involve weaker mechanisms of "top-down" processing (Happe and Frith 2006) and thus there is a weaker unified self or less "central coherence." In this view autistics have less social intelligence and difficulty with some kinds of concepts, but often greater mastery of details.
2. Autistic brains involve stronger mechanisms of "bottom up" processing, which allows for stronger perception and ordering of some kinds of detail. Autistics may have greater access to some kinds of information before that information undergoes additional filtering and compression. Note that #1 and #2 are conceptually distinct; under #2 autistics have a greater ability to call upon stronger top-down processing, even if lower-level processing is the default.9
3. Autistic brains have stronger abilities to engage in "systematizing" in preferred areas of interest (Baron-Cohen 2002). This hypothesis associates the autistic brain with skills in mathematics, engineering, and the hard sciences, and with weaknesses in empathizing. There is of course a tension between the emphasis on systematizing and the weak central coherence of #1; the hypotheses may apply to differing autistics or at least one of them may be wrong.
4. Autistic brains are characterized by a greater independence across different cognitive processes; the choices of processing mode and the scale at which information processing occurs are more likely "optional" than "automatic." It can be said that autistic brains respond to external signals in different, highly varying, and less automatic ways, relative to non-autistics. Note that if #1 and #3 stand in tension with each other (lack of central coherence, strong central coherence), #4 offers a possible resolution, namely that the non-automatic nature of processing
9 On autism and local processing, see for instance Mottron, Dawson, et al. (2006), Mottron, Burack, et al. (2003), and Drake, Redash, et al. (2010).
10

might account for manifestations of both tendencies, either within an individual autistic (at different times and in different areas) or across autistics.10 5. Autistics have strong hyper- and hypo-sensitivities at the sensory or perceptual levels, such as sensitivities to particular sounds (Rogers and Ozonoff 2005, Markram and Markram 2010). To the extent this is true, these sensitivities may follow from some of the differences in information processing listed above.
The usefulness of these particular conceptions is distinct from the validity of the cognitive profile approach more generally; that is, one may prefer yet different specifications of the cognitive profile of autism. But for the time being these hypotheses represent a good deal of the material we have to work with. I wish to proceed without making too definite a commitment to any particular view. The point is to consider the package as a whole, look for some common elements, and express those common elements in a language consistent with rational choice theory.
Autistics are very commonly described as having low "social intelligence" or lacking a "theory of mind." Even to the extent these characterizations are true, they are not fundamental enough for the question being posed here. Those traits would be manifestations of a more fundamental cognitive profile rather than a description of the profile itself. For instance the failure of autistics to pass some theory of mind tests seems to be picking up speech deficits and other cognitive problems. More generally, the social difficulties of autistics should be derived rather than definitional, in accordance with the cognitive approach.11
10 See Mottron, Dawson, et al. (2006) and Mottron, et al. (2009).
11 On theory of mind tests and why autistics sometimes fail them, see Gernsbacher and Frymiare (2005). Note also that I am not covering every possible cognitive difference. Belmonte (2009) argues that differential attention-shifting abilities are fundamental to autism. Izuma, Matsumoto, Camerer, and Adolphs (2011) consider a greater insensitivity to social reputation for autistics. On whether autism necessarily involves a defective "executive function," see Liss, Fein, Feinstein, Waterhouse, Allen and Dunn, Morris, and Rapin (2001), who are skeptical. Lombardo et al. (2009) consider whether autistics have atypical neural self-representation. Gernsbacher, Stevenson, Khandakar, and Goldsmith (2008) consider the atypicality of "joint attention" in autistics. It is also likely that
11

An implication of #1, #2, and #4, from the above list, is that the particular abilities and disabilities of autistics are not in general the same across individuals. For instance some autistics have specialized talents in recognizing pitch, some have memory talents, some, such as Temple Grandin, have talents in thinking in images, some have talents in organizing vast quantities of information rapidly, some are hyperlexic readers, and so on. The autistic cognitive profile is most of all marked by a diversity of talents and also a diversity of disabilities, not by a uniform set of abilities and disabilities. This fact probably requires that some overall "cognitive regulator" is different in autistics, relative to non-autistics. Arguably it's the difference in that regulator, and its interaction with environmental and other genetic factors, which gives rise to the observed diversity in autistic abilities, disabilities, and overall outcomes.
These diversities span several dimensions. They will span differing individuals, the same individual in different social or workplace settings, and the same individual but trying to perform different tasks.
This diversity of abilities and disabilities, across autistics, makes it difficult for some observers to see autism as a unified phenomenon. But if we define autism in terms of differential modes of information processing, high-variance autistic outcomes need not be seen as counterintuitive and in fact such variances are consistent with the underlying theory. Rational choice approaches have an easier time handling this diversity of talents and disabilities as an offshoot of a more primitive specification of a broad cognitive profile.12
autistics are less likely to think in terms of standard narrative and less likely to anthromorphize; see Barnes, Lombardo, Wheelwright, and Baron-Cohen (2009), Heberlein and Adolphs (2004), and Cowen (2009b).
12 On how the heterogeneity of autistic outcomes may be rooted in genetics, see Bruining, et al. (2010), and for a general perspective on heterogeneity in autism, see Pelphrey, et al. (2011). Similar points about heterogeneous outcomes can be applied to ADHD. ADHD is commonly defined as a series of cognitive deficits such as inability to pay attention to a single topic for sustained periods of time. Under a cognitive profile approach, ADHD
12

Let us now move to some specific predictions about autistic individuals.
IV. Rational choice models of autism and their predictions
I'm going to translate the cognitive discussion from above into an economic claim, namely that autistics face a higher variability of relative prices -- understood in terms of household production functions -- than do non-autistics.
The notion of household production functions is borrowed from Stigler and Becker (1977). To review that approach briefly, a household production function postulates a level of intermediation between marketplace goods and services and final sources of utility; Lancaster (1972) called these final sources of utility "characteristics" whereas Stigler and Becker label them "Z goods." A "Z good" for instance might be "freshness" or "excitement" and these Z goods are defined as the ultimate objects of desire. They are abstract qualities rather than concrete physical manifestations. Marketplace commodities are "X goods" - traditional physical representations such as bananas, suit jackets, automobiles, and so on. These X goods convert into Z goods at particular rates and those rates are summarized by the coefficients in household production functions. For instance one new suit jacket will offer some amount of "stylishness," some amount of "smooth feel," and some amount of "excitement," depending on the details of the household production function. To psychologists this is a stripped down and perhaps trivial portrait. Yet the point is to portray the concept of consumption prices simply, not to be psychologically realistic or fully descriptive. The approach will allow us to apply price theory to consumption in a relatively transparent manner.
can be understood as a different kind of information processing, which will involve both abilities and disabilities. It turns out that many ADHD-diagnosed individuals can exhibit focus, even extreme and highly effective focus, in the right environments and on the right subjects. The better understanding of ADHD is that outcomes will be variable, outcomes will depend on the interaction with environments, and the expression of disabilities at the social level will be an empirical prediction rather than a matter of assumption. Antshel, et al. (2007) offer useful perspectives on ADHD, and see White and Shah (2011) on cognitive advantages associated with ADHD.
13

In an economic framework, we can think of autistics as individuals who have household production functions with greater than average variance, namely in terms of the coefficients which convert objects of choice into final utility. For instance, drawing upon Pollak and Wachter (1975), a non-autistic household production function might look like this:
(1)
An autistic household production function will take a similar form but the variance of the summed z's will be higher, on average, for the autistic. In other words:
(2) !
where by construction the variance on the coefficients is higher than for the non-autistics. That is in essence a claim about the "shadow prices," as they are called, linking material commodities and the utilities which flow from those commodities. The key innovation is to view autistics as facing a higher variance of shadow prices.13
We also can describe differing autistics as having, among themselves, very different household production functions. This means that, across autistics, the coefficients on the household production functions vary to an especially high degree, compared to how they vary across non-autistics. For instance autistics seem to specialize a lot of their consumption in favored "hobby" areas, but there is no general presumption that the same areas will be selected and indeed great diversity can be observed, whether the areas of interest are music, stock prices, or more obscure forms of information.14
13 For a look at some genetic evidence, consistent with this idea of high variance, see Pinto, et al. (2010). 14 For an empirical look at the consumption behavior of Asperger individuals, which finds less "exploratory" behavior, see Baas and van Raaij (2010).
14

Intuitively, this conception of the autistic household production function reflects three core features of autism in simplified form. First, autistics are different from non-autistics at a fundamental level. Second, autistics enjoy some things a lot more and other things a lot less, relative to non-autistics. Third, autistics are not all alike in their enjoyments and dislikes.
This economic treatment is not intended as a "best possible understanding of autism" or as a complete understanding of autism. It is one way of translating some aspects of the autistic cognitive profile into a rational choice model. For a variety of issues concerning autism, it matters which relative prices have changed and it also may matter why those relative prices have changed, both in ways that are not always well-captured by rational choice models.
For instance the above household production function also captures some aspects of OCD and hoarding behavior, among other conditions. Nonetheless autism likely builds in high variance at a more fundamental level than do these other conditions, which are less based in differences in general information processing and seem to be more localized in their effects. Furthermore, a fuller approach would involve an adjudication of the competing claims about the cognitive profile of autism, and then the use of the preferred theory, to fill in some more specific claims about the utility functions of autistics. Instead of simply postulating higher variance in the household production function, the preferred or dominant mode of information processing could be connected to more specific marketplace goods, services, and kinds of experiences. The observed high variation across autistics renders such an exercise difficult and somewhat beyond the current state of knowledge. There are various particular claims about autistics ("autistics like to work as engineers," "autistics like to solve mathematical puzzles,") but the overall robustness of such claims, across the entire population of autistics, is an open question. There nonetheless remains the (unrealized) promise that common features of such avocations will be found, such as an underlying complexity or density of information.
15

From this idea of a household production function with greater variance on the coefficients, we can derive a number of predictions, each consistent with models of rational choice:
1. Autistics will specialize in consumption more than will non-autistics.
The household production function indicates that autistics face some (shadow) prices which are especially high and other prices which are especially low. The immediate implication is that autistics will specialize more in consumption.15 That is they will purchase or enjoy relatively large amounts of some goods, services, and activities, while remaining uninterested in others. This is consistent with a broad array of clinical and observational evidence, although the phenomenon is not usually described in economic terms. We should for instance expect to find a higher than average rate of autism among prominent collectors.
2. Autistics likely have lower price elasticities for many commodities and jobs.
Due to their specialized tastes and capabilities, autistics are less likely to be the strictly marginal demanders in a market. What they are doing they are especially likely to be fond of, and what they are not doing they are especially likely to dislike strongly, as explained above. Small variations in observed market prices are thus less likely to influence their discrete choices, such as whether to drink coffee, work in a particular occupation, and so on, controlling of course for income and other relevant economic variables.
3. Autistics will specialize in production to a higher than average degree.
15 Baas and van Raaij (2010) consider the consumer behavior of individuals diagnosed as Asperger's and find evidence of less exploratory consumer behavior.
16

On average people prefer to take jobs which they enjoy rather than jobs they dislike. Of course if most people feel this way, the fun jobs pay less and the dangerous or arduous jobs pay more. People face a trade-off between the wage and the fun of the job.
Autistics confront this calculus differently. Again, autistics enjoy some things much more and other things much less, relative to non-autistics. A direct implication is that they are more likely to take a job on the basis that they enjoy it. (Furthermore a job which autistics do not like is especially difficult for that individual.) Since autistics dislike an especially high number of activities, this implies, on average, greater specialization as a producer. For instance autistics are unlikely to take jobs which require them to be a "jack of all trades." Instead autistics more likely flourish in jobs which require some very specialized set of skills and which focus their energies on a specialized set of tasks.16
Furthermore, what autistics consider to be "a fun job" does not always match so closely to what non-autistics (or other autistics) consider to be a fun job. Autistics therefore face lower wage penalties for choosing fun (for them) jobs over non-fun (again, for them) jobs. At the margin, and relative to the wage, workplace enjoyment is again a value more likely to be a priority for autistics. This is all consistent with the common observation that autistics find great satisfaction in work and often flourish when they have a good work environment.
I am focusing on the utility function but there is also good evidence that the human capital skills of autistics are especially specialized. That is, autistics are especially good at some tasks and especially bad at others, relative to non-autistics, as mentioned above. On this point both the "enjoyment component" and the "human capital component" of the labor market decision point in the same direction, namely greater job specialization for autistics.
16 For a look at cognitive specialization and economic growth, see Hanushek and Woessmann (2008).
17

4. Autistics derive greater relative benefits from choosing features of their immediate environment.
This fourth proposition follows from the third. If an autistic wants a specialized job, he or she is also more likely to want a specialized environment and for broadly the same reasons. A typical environment will, on average, impose higher costs on the autistic person or at least involve a higher risk of such costs. This follows from consumption theory. If an individual has strongly diverging values for different goods and experiences, the returns to choosing are higher, compared to individuals who like all of those items to a more equal degree. Autistics will tend to place especially high values on freedom of choice for themselves.
To make this picture more concrete, most workplace and retail environments are designed by non-autistics for use by non-autistics. One result is that these environments emit "outputs," such as loud or piercing sounds or fluorescent lighting, which bother many autistics, probably for reasons which are related to their differential information processing. Often the offending outputs will seem normal to non-autistics, or within a tolerable range, but autistics will on average shy away from these environments. Autistics will, in relative terms, receive an especially higher return from being able to choose environments which help them process information effectively, leading to both greater enjoyment and higher productivity. In essence the autistics confront a lot of socially determined, non-optimal environments and thus they experience a high marginal return from changing those environments.
A related prediction, mentioned above, is that autistics are more likely to work at home rather than in a public office. When autistics do work outside the home, they should be more likely to choose environments which allow for more individual tailoring. They should be more likely to work in firms with personalized offices rather than "open plan" offices. In academia a professor can more or less control the contents of his office (within reason), and choose his or her own hours, again within reason. We should therefore expect a disproportionate representation of autistics working in colleges and
18

universities (Cowen 2009a). Another implied prediction is that autistics are less likely to marry or stay married, as marriage involves some requirement of a common home environment and thus it constrains the ability of an autistic to alter that environment. These questions await systematic empirical research but they are predictions of the theory.
5. The relative pecuniary returns of autistics will rise with economic growth and increasing market size.
It is a well-known proposition in economics, dating back to Adam Smith, that division of labor is limited by the extent of the market. The larger the size of the market, the greater the scope for specialization. Furthermore if a person has naturally specialized talents, or naturally specialized preferences for where and how to work, that person will do better in a large economy with a higher division of labor; this is a natural implication of the Becker and Murphy model (1992).
Autistics therefore will have higher earning potential, relative to non-autistics, in a wealthier and larger economy. It is easier for them to find the specialized jobs which they excel at and easier to make a good living from those jobs. To put this in more concrete terms, it is on average easier for an autistic to be a highly specialized surgeon than to be a general practitioner. It is easier for an autistic to be a crop scientist rather than running a large farm, again relative to non-autistics. The economic insights of Adam Smith thus imply relative optimism about the future for many neurodiverse individuals, including autistics.
Note that as economic growth proceeds, the highest earners among autistics may not be the "mild" autistics but rather they may be the "extreme" autistics. In this framework we can define mild autistics in terms of a relatively low variance of coefficients in the household production function and extreme autistics are those with a relatively high variance of coefficients. On average, it is quite possible or maybe even likely that the "extreme" autistics do worse in mainstream society in terms of income or social status.
19

Yet as specialization proceeds, some of the more extreme autistics will benefit disproportionately from their specialized abilities and this result is reflected in the model. The greater the division of labor, the higher the economic value to specialization and that will favor some subset of the extreme autistics to a greater degree than it will favor the "mild" autistics. When there is plenty of trade with others, a person's earnings more likely depend on his best skill than on his average skill. This runs contrary to the common implication that the successful autistics are the "mild" autistics and it challenges the identification between good life outcomes and autism severity, which is common in both the popular and scholarly literatures.17
The happiness of autistics
An interesting question is what the rational choice framework suggests about the happiness of autistics. There is some evidence that autistics are less happy than average; for instance many autistics suffer from depression or unemployment. Yet the reality is not as simple as those numbers indicate. First, unhappy or troubled autistics are perhaps more likely to be identified or diagnosed, especially given the DSM-IV definition of autism in terms of impairments. Second, many autistic people are on record that they do not wish to be "cured" of their autism and they consider their condition to be a difference rather than a disorder. While economists should not accept self-reports at face value, at the very least further investigation is in order.18
Economics offers a framework for categorizing these points of view and perhaps offering some advance in understanding. If we go back to autistics as individuals who face a higher variability of relative prices, the cognitive profile of autism, taken alone, need not
17 There is little work correlating later autistic outcomes with particular traits of autism, but see Szatmari, Bartolucci, Brenner, Bond, and Rich (1989), Howlin (2005) and Hoekstra, Happe, and Baron-Cohen (2009). For a recent discussion on metrics of severity of autism, see Roberts, Khan, et al. (2010).
18 The study of Hippler, Viding, Klicpera, and Happe (2009) suggests that Asperger individuals have rates of criminality similar to that of the general population.
20

imply lower levels of individual well-being. It is a standard economic exercise to demonstrate that exogenously given, mean-preserving increases in the variance of relative prices improve consumer welfare rather than damaging it (Samuelson 1972). When prices are low the consumer can buy a lot of favored items and when prices are high he or she can abstain; in terms of expected consumer surplus that is better for the consumer than the constant level of prices.
Again, individuals who face the high-variance relative prices will specialize in consumption, and perhaps appear unusual to others, but they will enjoy their preferred activities a great deal, relative to the prices of those activities. The specializing individual will enjoy high inframarginal consumer surplus, which is precisely what pushes them so far along the curve of consumption. That doesn't translate into a claim of greater happiness in a cardinal or psychological sense, but it does indicate that we need to think harder about the sources of autistic unhappiness. In other words, in an economic framework consumption specialization per se is a source of higher utility, not lower utility, at least when that specialization is the result of a response to greater price variability.
Of course insofar as autistics face higher mean prices, in their household production functions, they will be worse off. If we think about where autistics are most likely to face higher average shadow prices than non-autistics, it is often in external environments and social settings, for reasons discussed above. This gives us some pointers for how to make autistics happier, insofar as that is a public policy goal. It is counterproductive to try to reverse the specialization proclivities of autistics, as that is a deeply embedded source of their happiness, relative to non-autistics. The way to make autistics happier is to lower the absolute costs for them to interact with varied environments, including social environments.
It's less obvious that grouping autistics together in the same environments will make them much happier. Recall that while autistics have a higher variability of relative prices, it is not the case that each autistic person experiences the same pattern of variability. So
21

finding a common environment to make autistics happier, as a general group, may not be easy. The idea of an autistic commune or group setting is not obviously the way to boost autistic happiness, nor is segregation an obviously fruitful idea.
These points about relative prices illuminate some broader features of the autistic profile. For instance it is commonly asserted that autistics are more likely to be introverts and sometimes autism is explicitly associated with introverted personality types. This is misleading and there is no good evidence that autistics have the natural personality temperament of introverts to a greater degree than do non-autistics. It is the case that the observed behavior of autistics tends to mirror the observed behavior of introverts, precisely because autistics find externally imposed environments more costly on average. It is harder for an autistic to behave in public like an extroverted person, and succeed at doing so, even if he or she has a basic personality inclination toward extroversion. It is thus an entirely coherent concept to postulate an extroverted autistic. One prediction is that extroverted autistics will on average be less happy than introverted autistics. The introverted autistics will find themselves less frustrated by their external environments and they are already more inclined, for reasons of basic temperament, to eschew such environments.
Conceptualizing autistic savants
Originally it was believed that autistic savants were "mentally retarded" except for extreme performance in one area or a few areas, such as accurate drawing of perspective (often from memory), chord disaggregation abilities, multiplying numbers in their head, identifying numbers as prime or not, or exhibiting knowledge of calendar data in their heads, such as hearing a date in the distant future and rapidly knowing what day of the week it is. This picture has now been revised and it is recognized that most autistic savants are very intelligent, albeit not always in ways which mirror non-autistic intelligence. Furthermore estimates of the percentage of savants in the autistic population have been rising. One recent and conservative estimate (Howlin et al. 2009) suggests that at least one-third of all autistics have at least one savant-like ability.
22

Studying savants has generated more general knowledge about autistics. There is a research strategy to find a savant ability and then find that the non-savant autistics have superior performance in that same area. Studying savants for instance was the path toward discovering autistic abilities in pitch perception and identification. The implication is that savant performances represent an extreme but they also represent something general and fundamental about autism. In fact research on savants is one reason why the portrait of autism as "superior access to lower-level perceptual information" has commanded support (Snyder 2009). The savants who can display calendar knowledge rapidly for instance seem to have more or less direct access to certain kinds of lower-level operations in their brains, such as ordering abilities, visualization abilities, or abilities of memory that most people cannot access, even with training.
In a rational choice model we can think of a savant both as a consumer and as a producer. As a consumer, the savant can take in some inputs at remarkably low cost; these inputs may include the perceptions of numbers and their order, for instance. Some savants enjoy their savant abilities and specialize in consuming their own savant activities. Daniel Tammet (2009) for instance has written of his joy in contemplating numbers and their properties. As a producer, we can expect the savant to have an extreme of specialization across abilities. At some tasks, which may or may not yield a high marketplace wage, the savant will have an extreme comparative advantage. In other words, rational choice methods for conceptualizing savants are consistent with rational choice approaches to autistics more generally. Savants are extreme examples who "test" the portrait of autism offered above and overall they confirm the idea of a high variance across faculties, abilities, and enjoyments in autistics.
V. Predictions about autistics in economic games
The above predictions focus on consumer and producer theory but it is also interesting to think about autistics in the context of economic games and economic experiments. When it comes to games, it is less useful to ponder a priori predictions, since most games have
23

multiple equilibria and there are no simple predictions which follow directly from price theory. Instead we can move directly to observing how autistics play economic games and discuss what this might mean for understanding autism (and non-autistics).
There is some preliminary evidence on this question, most specifically a research paper by Sally and Hill (2006) called "The development of interpersonal strategy: Autism, theory-of-mind, cooperation and fairness." Sally and Hill summarize their results as follows:
"Young children were more cautious about initiating cooperation than their older peers and, in bargaining situations, they were less generous in their opening unilateral grants and over-solicitous of an empowered receiver. Participants with autism did have a harder time shifting strategy between versions of the Prisoners' Dilemma, and they were much more likely to accept low initial offers in the Ultimatum game and to refuse fair proposals."
Overall the researchers were surprised that the differences in strategy and performance between autistics and non-autistics were not greater than what they observed. They hypothesized that economic games don't demand much in terms of "theory of mind" skills but an alternative view is simply that autistics and non-autistics have similar performance on those skills in the constructed settings. Overall the evidence suggests that autistics play these games with a clear sense of strategy, even though some of their strategies differ from those of non-autistics.
One result is that autistics are more rational in ultimatum games when they receive the "short end of the stick." In other words, autistics, when confronted with inferior or less than 50-50 offers, are more likely to accept those offers rather than send both players, including themselves, to final payoffs of 0-0. In this regard the autistic players are apparently more rational in some ex post settings; their behavior is more likely to follow the dominance principle. One possibility is that autistics are flat out "more rational" in this setting. An alternative (but not mutually exclusive) hypothesis is that autistics are
24

less aware or less caring about the "social information" which makes a 30-70 offer "offensive" to many people.
When autistics play the first-mover role in the game, they are more likely to propose more than a 50-50 split for themselves and thus they are more likely to meet with rejection from the "fair-minded" other party. This is consistent with the view that autistics may be superior at implementing some formal canons of rationality and yet they process social information differently, socialize less, and have trouble forming focal points with non-autistics. The differential result is also consistent with an experiential hypothesis. For reasons of biography, we can expect that diagnosed autistics have an undue amount of practice playing life "games" from weaker or second mover positions. They are used to having to take what they have been offered, in part because of their low social status. These same autistics are less used to being in the proposing or agendasetting position and so that may be one reason why they perform worse in games when asked to play that role. In short, the results from Sally and Hill (2006) are consistent with a rational choice approach to autistics.
The paper "Explaining Enhanced Logical Consistency during Decision Making in Autism", by De Martino et al. (2008.), already mentioned above, suggests autistics are less likely to suffer from framing effects. A classic laboratory experiment starts people with a sum of money, in this case fifty British pounds, and offers them a comparison between two sure options: "keeping twenty pounds" and "losing thirty pounds." Given the starting point, the two outcomes are the same, even though one framing sounds positive and the other framing sounds negative. The participants are asked to compare the two sure outcomes to a series of risks. Once the outcome of potential gambles is framed in terms of a loss, rather than in terms of a consequentially equivalent gain, people will accept greater gambles to try to avoid any loss at all. They will take fewer risks when the certain position is framed in terms of a gain.
The non-autistic participants, when faced with a prospect framed in terms of losses ("loss aversion"), will do more to avoid any chance of (framed) loss. The autistic participants,
25

however, did significantly better at seeing that the talk of "loss" and "gain" was mere framing and that the two options should be treated the same, although they too showed some degree of loss aversion. Skin conductance tests, run during the experiment, indicated that the autistics reacted less emotionally to framing the one option in terms of loss rather than gain, yet overall they were at least as engaged in the task. This evidence, while hardly conclusive, is consistent with the view that the autistics are choosing more rationally in this setting. It also suggests that framing may stem from some kinds of emotional processing, including the confrontation of fear, and this can help us understand the behavior of non-autistics in laboratory and behavioral settings.19
VI. Autistics and economic discrimination
In very general terms, the practical problem is this. Discrimination usually proceeds by making a statistical judgment about averages (Becker 1971). Yet in the broader setting many of the gains stem from individual skills which are outliers, mobilized by marketplace division of labor. When the gains come from outliers, statistical discrimination, even if it is individually rational, will have lower than usual social returns. Furthermore, overall results can be superior when such statistical discrimination is abandoned rather than more finely grained. It's a frequent question in the autism community whether diagnosing autism leads to better results. While diagnoses do allow some identified individuals to receive additional resources, it supports the discriminatory category and it may lower overall social output and also lower the well-being of autistics.
When it comes to autism, we can see mechanisms for a high level of marketplace discrimination and this tendency is worsened by the high variance of outcomes within the group. In particular the autism label will come to be attached especially tightly to the low-productivity members of the group. Self-identification as autistic brings us to the economics of adverse selection. If an individual announces that he is autistic, and conveys no other information, those who receive the signal will assign that individual the
19 In different paper on cognitive biases, Morsanyi, Handley, and Evans (2010) show that autistic adolescents are less susceptible to the "conjunction fallacy."
26

average expected productivity of the identified group, namely autistics. For obvious reasons, autistics with higher-than-average productivity (compared to other autistics, or compared to other workers) will be reluctant to identify themselves to potential employers as autistic. Even if these individuals can offset the negative impressions of autistics with further signaling, such additional signaling is costly.
The more that high-productivity autistics eschew identification with autism, the lower the average reputation of autistics as workers will fall. That will make the higherproductivity autistics even more reluctant to accept the label and it will lower the reputation of autistics even further. This kind of analysis is well-known from more general analyses of adverse selection, but when it comes to autism there is a further twist. Many high-productivity autistics may not even recognize themselves as autistic. They are used to hearing the description of autistics as a low-productivity group and they regard themselves (correctly) as high-productivity and thus the connection to autism does not occur to them (incorrectly). So the segregation of reputation is not all due to asymmetric information but rather high-productivity autistics may be under-informed about themselves. This may be a reason why autistics have not in general had their interests represented in the public arena by a successful advocacy group.20
As with the used car market, markets develop institutions to certify quality in the presence of discrimination. As mentioned in the introduction, Danish entrepreneurs have recently started a firm Specialisterne, which employs autistics and Asperger's individuals and markets their services to high-tech firms.
More generally, in a discriminatory setting, terminology evolves to differentiate labels for the affected individuals. For instance there is increasing talk of "high- vs. lowfunctioning" autistics or of "Asperger's" vs. autism. In the popular arena such talk usually misrepresents the formal meaning of these terms as they might be used by
20 It is also the case that autistics experience workplace discrimination, they, unlike women, the elderly, or African-Americans do not have much recourse in terms of legal remedies, at least in the United States.
27

research scientists. Instead the talk tries to create categories which basically correspond to "autistics who currently do well in the non-autistic world" and "autistics who do poorly." On one hand this can be seen as a way of trying to identify and work with highproductivity autistics. The individuals who receive the more favorable labels will face lower costs of discrimination.
It's worth noting that many autistics object to these labeling tactics. First, it identifies one group of autistics as hopeless and will make their outcomes worse; this also can be viewed as limiting the "insurance" properties of using broader rather than more narrow labels. Second, there is not only considerable variation across autistics but there is also great diversity within the cognitive skills of a single autistic; in other words, a "highfunctioning" autistic will be very bad at some things and many "low-functioning" autistics will be very good at some things. Given costly observation, the risk of misunderstandings and inappropriate treatment may be relatively high. For instance Alan Turing as a talker was unimpressive, his life was not always well-organized, and people who met him did not always have a high opinion of his intelligence, at least not upon first glance (Cowen and Dawson 2009). The segregation of autistics into categories, based on the labels of outside observers, may increase the overall earnings risk and job satisfaction risk associated with being autistic.
VII. Concluding remarks
Economic reasoning indicates that many neurodiverse individuals can be understood in terms other than pathologies or disorders. Many apparently pathological forms of behavior may be rational or partially rational responses to differing environments and differing perceptual constraints, given different methods of information processing. An economic approach to autistics, and other neurodiverse individuals, remains an underexplored area for further research.
28

References
Abrahams, Brett S. and Geschwind, Daniel H. "Advance in autism genetics: on the threshold of a new neurobiology," Nature Reviews Genetics, May 2008, 9, 341-355.
Andari, Elissar, Jean-Rene Duhamel, Tiziana Zalla, Evelyn Herbrecht, Marion Leboyer, and Angela Sirigu, "Promoting Social Behavior with Oxytocin in High-Functioning Autism Spectrum Disorders." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Published online before print February 16, 2010, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0910249107.
Antshel, Kevin M., Stephen V. Faraone, Kimberly Stallone, Andrea Nave, Felice A. Kaufmann, Alysa Doyle, Ronna Fried, Larry Seidman, and Joseph Biederman, "Is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder a valid diagnosis in the presence of high IQ? Results from the MGH Longitudinal Family Studies of ADHD," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2007, 48, 7, 687-694.
Baas, Tjerk H. and van Raaij, Fred. "'Familiar or Risky': the Asperger symdrome affects exploratory consumer behaviour," Journal of Economic Psychology, 2010, doi: 10.1016/j.joep.2010.02.002.
Baranek, Grace T., Fabian J. David, Michele D. Poe, Wendy L. Stone, Linda R. Watson, "Sensory Experiences Questionnaire: Discriminating Sensory Features in Young Children with Autism, Developmental Delays, and Typical Development," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2006, 47, 6, 591-601.
Barnes, Jennifer L., Michael V. Lombardo, Sally Wheelwright, and Simon Baron-Cohen. "Moral Dilemmas Film Task: A Study of Spontaneous Narratives by Individuals with Autism Spectrum Conditions," Autism Research, July 2009, published on-line 2 July 2009, 2, 3, 148-156.
Baron-Cohen, Simon, "The extreme male brain theory of autism," Trends in Cognitive Science, 2002, 6, 248-254.
29

Baron-Cohen, Simon, Sally Wheelwright, Amy Burtenshaw, and Esther Hobson, "Mathematical Talent is Linked to Autism," Human Nature, June 2007, 18, 2, 125-131.
Becker, Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971.
Becker, Gary S and Murphy, Kevin M., "The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and Knowledge," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 4. (Nov., 1992), pp. 1137-1160.
Belmonte, Matthew K. "What's the Story Behind `Theory of Mind' and Autism?" Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2009, 16, no.6-7.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, "On the Potential of Neuroeconomics: A Critical (but Hopeful) Appraisal." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2009, 1:2, 1-41.
Bowler, Dermot. Autism Spectrum Disorders: Psychological Theory and Research, West Sussex, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Brocas, Isabelle. and Carillo, Juan. The Brain as a Hierarchical Organization, American Economic Review, September 2008, 98, 4, 1312-46.
Bruining, Hilgo, and Leo de Sonneville, Hanna Swaab, Maretha de Jonge, Martien Kas, Herman van Engeland, and Jacob Vorstman," "Dissecting the Clinical Heterogeneity of Autism Spectrum Disorders through Defined Genotypes." PloS ONE, May 2010, 5, 5, e10887.
Jonathan M. Campbell, "Diagnostic Assessment of Asperger's Disorder: A Review of Five Third-Party Rating Scales," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, February 2005, 35, 1, 25-35.
Camerer, Colin, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec. 2005. "Neuroeconomics: How Neuroscience Can Inform Economics." Journal of Economic Literature, 43(1): 9-64.
30

Cowen, Tyler. "Autism as Academic Paradigm." Chronicle of Higher Education, July 13, 2009a.
Cowen, Tyler. Create Your Own Economy. New York: Dutton, 2009b.
Cowen, Tyler and Dawson, Michelle, "What does the Turing test really mean And how many human beings (including Turing) could pass?", unpublished manuscript 2009, http://www.gmu.edu/centers/publicchoice/faculty%20pages/Tyler/turingfinal.pdf.
Dawson, Michelle, Laurent Mottron, and Morton Ann Gernsbacher, "Learning in Autism," In J.H. Bryne (series editor) and H. Roediger (volume editor), Learning and Memory: A Comprehensive Reference. New York: Elsevier, 2008.
Dawson, Michelle, Isabelle Soulieres, Morton Ann Gernsbacher and Laurent Mottron, "The Level and Nature of Autistic Intelligence," Psychological Science, 2007, 18, 8, 657662.
De Martino, Benedetto, Neil A. Harrison, Steven Knafo, Geoff Bird, and Raymond J. Dolan, "Explaining Enhanced Logical Consistency during Decision Making in Autism," The Journal of Neuroscience, October 15, 2008, 28 (42): 10746-10750.
Drake, Jennifer E., Amanda Redash, Katelyn Coleman, Jennifer Haimson, and Ellen Winner. "'Autistic' Local Processing Bias also Found in Children Gifted in Realistic Drawing," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, Published on-line 05 January 2010, DOI 10.1007/s10803-009-0923-0.
Durkin, Maureen S. and Matthew J. Maenner, F. John Meaney, Susan E. Levy, Carolyn DiGuiseppi, Joyce S. Nicholas, Russell S. Kirby, Jennifer A. Pinto-Martin, and Laura A. Schieve, "Socioeconomic Inequality in the Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder: Evidence from a U.S. Cross-Sectional Study, PLoS ONE, July 2010, vol.5, no.7, e11551.
Farmelo, Graham. The Strangest Man: The Hidden Life of Paul Dirac, Mystic of the Atom. New York: Basic Books, 2009.
31

Fitzpatrick, Michael. "Making autism "normal" won't help my son." The Times, October 12, 2009, available on-line.
Gernsbacher, Morton Ann and Jennifer L. Frymiare, "Does the Autistic Brain Lack Core Modules?" Journal of Developmental and Learning Disorders, 2005, 9, 3-16.
Gernsbacher, Morton Ann, Jennifer L. Stevenson, Suraiya Khandakar, and H. Hill Goldsmith, "Why Does Joint Attention Look Atypical in Autism?" Child Development Perspectives, 2008, 2, 1, 38-45.
Glimcher, Paul W., and Colin F. Camerer, Ernst Fehr, and Russell A. Poldrack. Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and the Brain. Amsterdam: Elsevier Press, 2009.
Happe, Francesca and Uta Frith, "The Weak Coherence Account: Detail-focused Cognitive Style in Autism Spectrum Disorders," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, January 2006, 36, 1, 5-25.
Hayek, Friedrich A. The Sensory Order: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology, University of Chicago Press, 1963 [1952].
Hanushek, Eric A. and Woessmann, Ludger. "The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic Development," Journal of Economic Literature, September 2008, XLVI, 3, 607-668.
Heberlein, Andrea S., and Adolphs, Ralph. "Impaired spontaneous amthropomorphizing despite intact perception and social knowledge," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2004, published on-line, May 3, 2004, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308220101.
Hippler, Kathrin, Essi Viding, Christian Klicpera, Francesca Happe. "Brief Report: No Increase in Criminal Convictions in Hans Asperger's Original Cohort." Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, forthcoming, published on-line 2009 at http://www.springerlink.com/content/g5653554rk2l0j34/.
32

Hoekstra, R.A., Happe, F. Baron-Cohen, S. and Ronald, A. "Association between extreme autistic traits and intellectual disability: insights from a general population twin study," The British Journal of Psychiatry, 2009, 195, 531-536.
Howlin, Patricia "Outcomes in Autism Spectrum Disorders," Handbook of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders, 2005 edition, vol.I, op. cit., pp.201-222.
Howlin, Patricia, Susan Goode, Jane Hutton, and Michael Rutter, "Savant skills in autism: psychometric approaches and parental reports." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, May 2009, vol. 364 no. 1522, 1359-1367, doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0328.
Izuma, Keise and Keji Matsumoto, Colin F. Camerer, and Ralph Adolphs, "Insensitivity to Social Reputation in Autism," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2011, 109(42):17302-17307, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1107038108.
Kishida, Kenneth T., Brooks King-Casas, and P. Read Montague. "Neuroeconomic Approaches to Mental Disorders," Neuron, 2010, DOI 10.1016.j.neuron.2010.07.021.
Lancaster, Kelvin. Consumer Demand: A New Approach. New York: Columbia University Press, 1972.
Liss, Miriam and Deborah Fein, Carl Feinstein, Lynn Waterhouse, Doris Allen and Michelle Dunn, Robin Morris, Isabelle Rapin, "Executive Functioning in HighFunctioning Children with Autism," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2001, 42, 2, 261-270.
Lopez, Beatriz and Susan R. Leekam, "Do Children with Autism Fail to Process Information in Context?" Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2003, 44, 2, 285300.
Lombardo, Michael V., Bhismadev Chakrabarti, Edward T. Bullmore, Susan A. Sadek, Greg Pasco, Sally J. Wheelwright, John Suckling, MRC AIMS Consortium, and Simon
33

Baron-Cohen, "Atypical neural self-representation in autism," Brain Advance Access, published December 13, 2009, doi:10.1093/brain/awp306.
Kathleen E. Macintosh and Cheryl Dissanayake, "Annotation: The Similarities and Differences Between Autistic Disorder and Asperger's Disorder: A Review of the Empirical Evidence," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2004, 45, 3, 421-434.
Markram, Kamila and Henry Markram, "The Intense World Theory - a Unifying Theory of the Neurobiology of Autism," Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 21 December 2010, 4:224.
Morsanyi, Kinga, Simon J. Handley, and Jonathan S.B.T. Evans, "Decontextualised Minds: Adolescents with Autism are Less susceptible to the Conjunction Fallacy than Typically Developing Adolescents," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 17 March 2010, 40(11), 1378-88.
Moss, J. and Howlin, P. "Autism spectrum disorders in genetic syndromes: implications for diagnosis, intervention and understanding the wider autism spectrum disorder population," Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 53, 10: 852-873.
Mottron, L., J. A. Burack, G. Iarocci, S. Belleville, J.T. Enns, "Locally oriented perception with intact global processing among adolescents with high functioning autism," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2003, 44, 904-913.
Mottron, L., M. Dawson, I. Soulieres, B. Hubert, and J. Burack, "Enhanced Perceptual Functioning in Autism: An Update, and Eight Principles of Autistic Perception," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 2006, 36, 27-43.
Mottron, L., Dawson, M., and Soulieres, I., Enhanced perception in savant syndrome: Patterns, structure and creativity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2009, 364, 1385-1391
34

Peart, Sandra and Levy, David M. The "Vanity of the Philosopher": From Equality to Hierarchy in Post-Classical Economics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2005.
Pelphrey, Kevin A., Sarah Shultz, Caitlin M. Hudac, and Brent C. Vander Wyk, "Research Review: Constraining heterogeneity: the social brain and its development in autism spectrum disorder," The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, June 2011, 52(6):631-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02349.x.
Pinto, Dalila, et al. "Functional Impact of Global Rare Copy Number Variation in Autism Spectrum Disorders," Nature, 466, 368-372, 15 July 2010.
Roberts, Timothy P.L., Sarah Y. Khan, Mike Rey, Justin F. Monroe, Kaeylyn Cannon, Lisa Blaskey, Sarah Woldoff, Saba Qasmieh, Mike Gandal, Gwen L. Schmidt, Deborah M. Zarnow, Susan E. Levy, and J. Christopher Edgar, "MEG Detection of Delayed Auditory Evoked Responses in Autism Spectrum Disorders: Towards an Imaging Biomarker for Autism," Autism Research, 2010, 3: 1-11.
Rogers, Sally J. and Ozonoff, Sally. "Annotation: What do we know about sensory dysfunction in autism? A critical review of the empirical evidence," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2005, 46, 12, 1255-1268.
Rustichini, Aldo. "Is There a Method of Neuroeconomics?" American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, August 2009, 1, 2, 48-59.
Sally, David and Hill, Elisabeth. "The development of interpersonal strategy: Autism, theory-of-mind, cooperation and fairness." Journal of Economic Psychology, 27 (2006) 73-97.
Samuelson, Paul A. "The Consumer Does Benefit From Feasible Price Stability," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1972, 86, (3), 476-93.
35

Snyder, Allan, "Explaining and inducing savant skills: privileged access to lower level, less-processed information," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 2009, 364, 1399-1405.
Sowell, Thomas, Late-Talking Children, New York: Basic Books, 1997.
Sowell, Thomas, The Einstein Syndrome: Bright Children Who Talk Late, New York: Basic Books, 2002.
Stigler, George J. and Becker, Gary S. De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum. American Economic Review 67 (1977), pp. 76-90. P. Szatmari, G. Bartolucci, R. Brenner, S. Bond, and S. Rich, "A Follow-Up Study of High-Functioning Autistic Children," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 1989, 19, 2, 213-225. Tammet, Daniel. Embracing the Wide Sky: A Tour Across the Horizons of the Mind. New York: Free Press, 2009. Handbook of Autism and Developmental Disorders, volume one, 2005 edition, edited by Fred R. Volkmar, Rhea Paul, Ami Klin, and Donald Cohen. White, Holly A. and Priti Shah. "Creative style and achievement in adults with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder," Personality and Individual Differences, 2011; 50 (5): 673 DOI: 10.1016/j.paid.2010.12.015 Yoshida, Wako, Isabel Dziobek, Dorit Kliemann, Hauke R. Heekeren, Karl J. Friston, and Ray J. Dolan, "Cooperation and Heterogeneity of the Autistic Mind," The Journal of Neuroscience, June 30, 2010, 30(26):8815-8818.
36

