Journal of Health Communication, 18:1084-1096, 2013 Copyright (c) Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN: 1081-0730 print/1087-0415 online DOI: 10.1080/10810730.2013.768732
Food Marketing to Children on U.S. Spanish-Language Television
DALE KUNKEL
Department of Communication, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA
DANA MASTRO
Department of Communication, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, USA
MICHELLE ORTIZ
Department of Communication, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
CHRISTOPHER MCKINLEY
Department of Communication Studies, Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey, USA
Latino children in particular are at risk of childhood obesity. Because exposure to televised food marketing is a contributor to childhood obesity, it is important to examine the nutritional quality of foods advertised on Spanish-language children's programming. The authors analyzed a sample of 158 Spanish-language children's television programs for its advertising content and compared them with an equivalent sample of English-language advertising. The authors evaluated nutritional quality of each advertised product using a food rating system from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In addition, the authors assessed compliance with industry self-regulatory pledges. The authors found that amount of food advertising on Spanish-language channels (M = 2.2 ads/ hour) was lower than on English-language programs, but the nutritional quality of food products on Spanish-language channels was substantially poorer than on English channels. Industry self-regulation was less effective on Spanish-language channels. The study provides clear evidence of significant disparities. Food advertising targeted at Spanish-speaking children is more likely to promote nutritionally poor food products than advertising on English-language channels. Industry self-regulation is less effective on Spanish-language television channels. Given the disproportionately high rate of childhood obesity among Latinos, the study's findings hold important implications for public health policy.
This research was supported by a grant to the first two authors from the Healthy Eating Research Program of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Address correspondence to Dale Kunkel, Department of Communication, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. E-mail: kunkel@u.arizona.edu
1084

Food Marketing to Children

1085

Although the prevalence of overweight and obesity among U.S. children of all racial/ ethnic backgrounds is widely recognized as a critical health problem facing the nation, Latinos are disproportionally affected by this threat (Bethell, Simpson, Stumbo, Carle, & Gombojav, 2010; Nyberg, Ramirez, & Gallion, 2011a). For example, nearly 28% of Mexican American boys aged 6-11 years are overweight, compared with approximately 16% of Whites (Ogden, Carroll, & Flegal, 2008). The same pattern exists among 6-11-year-old Mexican American girls, approximately 20% of whom are overweight, compared with 14% among Whites. Other age groups show similar trends (Kimbro, Brooks-Gunn, & McLanahan, 2007). Limited data are available for other Latino ethnic groups, but considering that Mexican Americans comprise 64% of the U.S. Latino population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2006), these figures are alarming and underscore the need to identify factors that contribute to this ethnic disparity in childhood obesity patterns.
Exposure to televised food marketing is one of a number of key factors influencing the overall child population's diet and eating preferences, ultimately affecting outcomes such as overweight and obesity (Institute of Medicine, 2006; Kaiser Family Foundation, 2004). Food advertising to children has long been dominated by lownutrient, high-calorie products (Larson & Story, 2008; Palmer & Carpenter, 2006), and the fact that younger children do not comprehend the persuasive intent of commercial messages (Calvert, 2008; Kunkel et al., 2004) exacerbates concern about marketing influence. Televised food marketing to children has been deemed so problematic that the Institute of Medicine (2006) recommended that if voluntary industry efforts "are unsuccessful in shifting the emphasis away from high-calorie and low-nutrient foods and beverages to the advertising of healthful foods and beverages, Congress should enact legislation mandating the shift on both broadcast and cable channels" (p. 386).
While extensive research has been conducted to examine food marketing to children across the overall media environment, little is known about advertising targeted specifically at Latino children. The association between food marketing and childhood obesity gains increasing consequence in light of evidence that Latino children typically spend more time with television than White children (Bickham et al., 2003; Rideout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010), as well as recent assertions that Latino youth may be particularly vulnerable to mass media marketing efforts (Grier, 2009; Grier & Kumanyika, 2010). Moreover, some evidence indicates that Latino communities in the United States are disproportionately targeted with less healthful, obesogenic products in local stores and outdoor advertising (Yancey et al., 2009). Although exposure to English-language television programming is also common for a majority of Latino children, it nonetheless makes sense to examine patterns of food marketing presented on Spanish-language children's television programming in the United States in order to determine how such advertising compares to industry norms for the mainstream English-language environment.
According to U.S. Census data, 39% of the 44.3 million Latinos in the United States speak mostly or only Spanish (Coffey & Sanders, 2010). It is notable that approximately 75% of the more than 8 million U.S. children age 5 to 17 years who speak Spanish in the home report speaking English "very well" (U.S. Census Bureau, 2008). Thus, the plurality of Latino children can (and likely do) choose from English- and Spanish-language television offerings. No research has yet specified the proportion of television viewing by Latino children that is devoted to Spanish- versus English-language channels. But even without such estimates, it is reasonable to assume that advertising presented on Spanishlanguage programming in the U.S. is most likely to be viewed by Latinos (Moran, 2007).
Dozens of studies have examined advertising in children's programming on English-speaking television, but only a handful have examined food marketing on

1086

D. Kunkel et al.

Spanish-language programming. One study analyzed food advertisements on the two most widely viewed Spanish-language broadcast networks, Telemundo and Univision, examining programs airing weekdays between 3:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. (Thompson, Flores, Ebel, & Christakis, 2007), hours that are popular with child viewers. An average of 2.5 food/beverage commercials appeared each hour, accounting for 15% of all product advertising. Commercials for fast food restaurants represented 44% of the total volume of food advertising, and roughly one out of every three (31%) food ads were judged to be targeted to children. A second study (Bell, Cassady, Culp, & Alcalay, 2009) examined food advertising that appeared on 10 English-language channels and 2 Spanish-language networks, Telemundo and Univision, during programs on Saturday mornings and weekday afternoons, both times when children are frequent viewers. This research found that 70% of food commercials on all channels were for products in five categories characterized by high fat or sugar content, but the study did not report broad-based comparisons for English-language networks versus Spanish-language networks. Rather, it identified one key finding that proved statistically significant, that fast food restaurant advertising was more likely to appear on Spanish-language channels (47% of all food ads), as compared with English-language channels (28% of all food ads). However, both studies note that most of the Spanishlanguage programs in their analysis were adult-oriented, and thus little knowledge exists about food marketing patterns on Spanish-language children's programming. This study addresses that void.
The present investigation systematically examines the Spanish-language children's television environment to better understand the patterns of food advertising targeted at child audiences, and to identify any disparities that may exist in comparison to the advertising found on English-language channels. In this research, we report findings on the nature and amount of food marketing that appears in a broad-based sample of Spanish-language children's programming on broadcast and cable networks, and contrast it with the marketing patterns observed in a comparable sample of Englishlanguage children's programming. In addition, we incorporate two other types of analyses that go beyond any previous evidence presented regarding Spanish-language food marketing to children.
First, this research uses a unique measurement strategy for evaluating the nutritional quality of advertised foods. Most of the previous studies of food advertising to children either measure product types without any independent evaluation of nutritional quality (as with the two studies of Spanish-language programming mentioned earlier) or, alternatively, report such detailed nutritional information that it is difficult to draw practical conclusions from the evidence. The former approach is clearly inadequate, particularly as marketers' practices evolve toward healthier foods. Although in the past one might reasonably have surmised that a fast food ad represented a nonnutritious product, today such an ad might just as likely present a fruit plate as opposed to a burger and fries.
This underscores that the nutritional quality of the foods advertised in each commercial must be carefully measured, rather than inferred. Kunkel and colleagues (Kunkel, McKinley, & Wright, 2009; Stitt & Kunkel, 2008) have successfully implemented a measurement framework that is based on a consumer-oriented food rating guide devised by the Department of Health and Human Services as part of the agency's WE-CAN (Ways to Enhance Children's Activity and Nutrition) public information initiative (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2005). These measures simplify the evaluation of nutritional quality, while maintaining strong rigor and credibility, thus maximizing the value of the evidence produced by the study.

Food Marketing to Children

1087

Second, the study evaluates compliance with a food marketing industry selfregulatory program known as the Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative. To respond to public concern about the poor nutritional quality of the foods marketed to children, a coalition of major food companies has collaborated with the National Council of Better Business Bureaus to establish an industry self-regulatory framework designed to improve the nutritional quality of foods advertised to children (National Council of Better Business Bureaus, 2007). Among the companies participating in the initiative are many of the nation's largest food conglomerates.
As part of the industry initiative, each company has issued a detailed pledge of its commitment to limit its marketing efforts targeted at children to healthier food products, or in some cases, not to advertise to children at all. Participating companies have also pledged to restrict the use of licensed characters solely to advertising for foods that meet their specific nutritional standards for healthier products. It is important to note, however, that each company defines what constitutes a "healthier" food product based upon differing nutritional criteria. Proponents of industry self-regulation assert that this initiative will "change the landscape of child-directed advertising" (Peeler, Kolish, & Enright, 2009, p. 1) and thus avoid the need for any direct governmental regulation of food marketing to children. Independent evidence indicates that self-regulation has not significantly improved the overall nutritional quality of foods advertised to children on English-language television (Harris et al., 2010; Kunkel et al., 2009: Powell, Szczypka, & Chaloupka, 2011) This study provides an evaluation of how well the industry's initiative has achieved its goal for Spanish-language food marketing to children, comparing the effect of self-regulation on Spanish-language advertising with the patterns observed for English-language commercials. The study also examines the use of certain sensitive advertising tactics such as the use of licensed characters to influence children, as well as the promotion of child-targeted internet sites maintained by food companies.
Method
Sample
The study examines the advertising content contained in children's programming on the most widely viewed Spanish-language broadcast and cable networks that air at least 3 hours weekly of child-oriented content. We included four major national Spanish-language broadcast networks (Azteca America, Telefutura, Telemundo, and Univision) and three Spanish-language cable networks (Discovery Familia, Disney XD, and Sorpresa). Discovery Familia dedicates part of its daily program offerings to children's shows, whereas Disney XD and Sorpesa are devoted entirely to children's programming. Discovery Familia and Sorpresa deliver all content in Spanish, whereas Disney XD varies the language of its shows, including English and Spanish. Only Spanish-language material was included in the sample of programming.
The sampling design involves the creation of two composite days for each network included in the study. Composite days are created by recording programming at randomly selected times over a period of several months until an entire day's regular schedule has been re-created through the composite collection process for each network. The sampling strategy ultimately captures one episode of all children's programming that regularly airs between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on each of the targeted channels on each selected day of the week. Children's programs were defined as any show with a V-chip rating of TV-Y (appropriate for all children) or TV-Y7

1088

D. Kunkel et al.

(appropriate for children aged 7 and older),1 which encompasses all programs targeted at children up to 12 years of age.
The final sample consisted of 158 Spanish-language children's shows, representing 79 hours of content. All programs in the sample contained advertising messages, with the exception of two episodes of Dora la Exploradora airing on Univision. The programs were recorded between February 7 and April 18, 2009. The data employed for comparison purposes with English-language advertising patterns were derived from a complementary study reported separately (Kunkel et al., 2009). The study of food marketing to children on English-language channels employed identical methods and measures, analyzing a sample of advertising contained in 139 shows, representing 70.5 hours of children's programming across seven broadcast and cable networks.

Measures
We assessed all product advertising for number of ads and length of time. Commercials devoted to food products were analyzed for product type. Categories were constructed in an effort to discriminate more healthy from less healthy foods, while facilitating comparisons with previous research to the greatest extent possible. When necessary, we obtained information required to properly classify advertised products by consulting ingredient labels on products and/or company websites. Categories included the following: sugared snacks, salted snacks, sugared beverages, sugared cereals, pastries/waffles, pasta, fast food/restaurants, dairy, fruits/vegetables/100% fruit juice, and prepackaged lunches, among others. Applicable products were considered "sugared snacks" or "sugared cereals" if sugar was one of the first three ingredients listed. Drinks were considered "sugared beverages" if they included any added sugar.
In addition to classifying food commercials descriptively by product type, each advertisement was also categorized according to its fit with a food rating system devised by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2005). The Department of Health and Human Services employs a public information campaign known as WE CAN (Ways to Enhance Children's Activity and Nutrition) to help parents select a healthy diet for their children. The food rating system differentiates products into three categories: Go, Slow, and Whoa. Go foods are products rich in nutrients and relatively low in calories. They are low in fat and added sugar and therefore can be consumed "almost anytime" (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2005, p. 14). Examples include vegetables, fruits, whole grain breads or breakfast cereals, fig bars, lowfat yogurt, nonfat milk, or diet soda. Slow foods are higher in fat, added sugar, and calories than Go foods, and should be consumed "sometimes, at most several times a week" (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2005, p. 14). Examples include broiled hamburgers, nuts or peanut butter, waffles, most pastas, 100% juice, sports drinks, and 2% lowfat milk. Whoa foods are high in calories and low in nutrients. They are highest in fat and added sugar, and should be consumed "only once in awhile or on special occasions" and then only in small portions (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2005, p. 14). Examples include French

1The Sorpresa network does not apply V-chip ratings to its programming. However, the channel markets itself as the only Spanish-language cable network in the United States that targets children 2-17 years of age (Sorpresa, 2009). All programs airing between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. that were judged to be clearly targeted at children 2-12 years of age were included in the sample.

Food Marketing to Children

1089

fries, fried chicken, hamburgers, cookies, cakes, pies, ice cream, candy, whole milk, and regular soda.
Certain tactics used by food marketers to increase the attractiveness of their products to children were measured, including the use of spokes-characters (characters associated solely with the product, e.g., Cap'n Crunch, Ronald McDonald); licensed characters/celebrity product endorsers (characters whose popularity is not originally associated with a food product, e.g., SpongeBob SquarePants, Dora the Explorer); contests; premiums; and website promotions (ad identifies a web address for children to visit that is sponsored by the food company, e.g., Postopia.com).
To evaluate compliance with self-regulatory pledges regarding the nutritional standards and use of licensed characters, we compared all products observed in advertising monitored by the study to the nutritional guidelines specified by the relevant parent company, as part of the Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative. To confirm product ingredients, we relied on information included in the labeling for each product.

Data Coding and Reliability
Four undergraduate students, all fluent Spanish speakers, coded data for this project. The students received rigorous training and practice over a 10-week period before data collection began. Once coding observations for the advertising measures began, inter-coder reliability was assessed on a bi-weekly basis. Ten programs from the sample (6.3% of all programs) were randomly selected for reliability assessment, containing a total of 35 food ads (20.5% of all food ads). Reliabilities were calculated using Scott's pi, which corrects for chance agreement. All measures reported here exceeded .90 intercoder agreement across all reliability assessments.

Results
A total of 1,050 commercials appeared in the sample of Spanish-language children's programming. This represents an average of 13.3 product ads, amounting to approximately 8:43 minutes of commercial time, per hour of programming. Within this total base of advertising content, 171 commercials (16%) were identified as ads for food products. This amounts to roughly 2.2 food ads per hour of children's programming, accounting for 0:47 of time devoted to marketing of food products (see Table 1).

Table 1. Amount of advertising, by program language

Spanish

English

Number of food ads per hour Number of minutes per hour devoted to food ads Number of non-food ads per hour Number of minutes per hour devoted to non-food ads Number of total ads per hour Number of minutes per hour devoted to total ads

2.2a 0:47a 11.1a 7:56
13.3a 8:43a

7.6b 2:44b 18.2b 7:49
25.8b 10:34b

Note. Differing subscripts within rows denote significantly different means using a t test, p < .05.

1090

D. Kunkel et al.

The comparisons between food marketing to children on Spanish-language and English-language channels presented in Table 1 indicate that there is a lower rate of advertising for food and beverage products on Spanish-language channels than on English-language channels. This outcome appears to be shaped in part by a broader pattern in which the overall volume of advertising to children for all products is significantly greater on English-language than Spanish-language programming. This pattern applies in terms of amount of time devoted to ads and to the number of commercial messages presented.
In terms of product types advertised, fast food restaurants predominate, accounting for nearly half (46%) of all food marketing on Spanish-language children's programming (see Table 2). Sugared snacks (21.1%) and sugared cereals (19.9%) account for most of the remaining food ads on Spanish-language channels. Comparisons with advertising patterns on English-language channels revealed two significant differences. Fast food ads appear at a significantly higher rate in Spanish-language advertising (46.2%) as compared with English-language advertising (35.5%) to children. Similarly, sugared snack commercials appear at a higher rate in Spanish-language advertising (21.1%) versus English-language advertising (10.1%).

Evaluating Nutritional Quality in Foods Advertised to Children
As noted earlier, it is important to analyze the nutritional quality of the foods marketed to children rather than to draw inferences based solely on information about the type of products advertised, as many previous studies have done. One of the strengths of this study is its independent analysis of the nutritional quality of each food product presented in all commercials shown during children's programming. To accomplish this analysis, we employ the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Go, Slow, Whoa food rating framework. Our analysis reveals that 84.2% of all foods and beverages advertised during Spanish-language children's shows are classified in the poorest nutritional category, labeled as Whoa products (see Figure 1). An additional 15.2% of ads promote moderately nutritious foods known as Slow products, while only 0.6% of commercials feature truly healthy Go products that can be eaten safely on a daily basis.

Table 2. Frequency of food product types advertised, by program language

Spanish

English

Product type
Fast foods/restaurants Sugared snacks Sugared cereals Dairy Salted snacks Sugared beverages Other Total

n
79 36 34 15 2 1
4 171

%
46.2a 21.1a 19.9
8.8 1.2 0.6 2.2 100.0

n
190 54 138 30 33 38 51 534

%
35.5b 10.1b 25.8 5.6 6.2 7.1 9.7 100.0

Note. Differing subscripts within rows denote significantly different frequencies at p < .05; this is based on z values   1.96.

Food Marketing to Children

1091

Figure 1. Comparisons of nutritional quality in food ads for industry overall by program language. Differing subscripts among columns denote significantly different frequencies at p < .01. This is based on z values   3.04. (Color figure available online.)
Figure 1 presents the critical comparison between advertising to children on Spanish-language versus English-language television programming. Although both programming contexts reflect a strong predominance of nutritionally poor food products throughout their overall volume of food advertising, Spanish-language channels presented a significantly higher percentage of commercials for unhealthy products as compared with English-language channels. Again, 84.2% of food and beverage ads on Spanish-language channels promoted products classified in the lowest nutritional category, labeled Whoa foods, as compared with only 72.5% on English-language channels. English-based advertising promoted significantly more products in the moderately nutritious Slow category (26.6% vs. 15.2%), whereas almost no advertising in either format was devoted to truly healthy Go products.
Evaluation of Industry Self-Regulation
Of the 171 Spanish-language food ads identified by the study, roughly half (50.9%) originated from companies participating in the Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative. In contrast, 71.3% of all food ads on English-language children's programming originated from companies participating in self-regulation. General Mills, Dannon, and Burger King were the three heaviest food marketers on Spanishlanguage television, accounting for more than one third (36.2%) of all food ads shown during children's programs. On English-language television, Kraft, McDonald's, and General Mills presented the greatest number of ads, accounting for 47.9% of all food ads, though these three companies represented only 27.5% of food advertising on Spanish-language television. In sum, it appears that the reach of industry self-regulation is much more limited on Spanish-language channels, as compared with English-language channels. It also seems that companies tend to vary their volume of food advertising across these two media environments, such that different companies predominate in food marketing to children on Spanish-language as opposed to English-language channels.

1092

D. Kunkel et al.

Each company participating in the Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative has established a distinct commitment to improve the nutritional quality of foods marketed to children. Four companies (Cadbury-Adams, Coca-Cola, Hershey's, Mars) pledged not to advertise any products to children at all, and no commercials from any of them were observed in the research. Eleven other companies (Burger King, Campbell's, ConAgra Foods, Dannon, General Mills, Kellogg's, Kraft, McDonalds, Nestle, PepsiCo, Unilever) pledged to advertise only foods that met each company's unique criteria for defining a "healthier" food product. Of these 11 companies, our study observed advertising from eight of them (listed in order of frequency: General Mills, Dannon, Burger King, Kellogg's, McDonalds, Kraft, Campbell's, Nestle), and all of their ads were judged to be in compliance with guidelines of the Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative. That is, each ad from a participating company featured a product that met all elements of the applicable company's nutrition standard, as specified in its individual pledge.
It is important to note, however, that while compliance with industry self-regulation was at 100%, the Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative did not appear to accomplish any meaningful improvements in the nutritional quality of foods marketed to children on Spanish-language television. As noted in the preceding section, 84.2% of all advertised foods were classified in the poorest nutritional category, while less than 1% of products advertised were for truly healthy foods. These data illustrate a fundamental disconnect between the way in which food products are defined as healthy according to the pledge criteria used by industry self-regulation, and the way in which healthy nutritional quality is judged from an independent perspective. Most companies allow a product to qualify as "healthier" under their nutritional standards simply as the result of reducing undesirable ingredients at a modest level. For example, a product that has substantial added sugar, fat, or salt can qualify for the "healthier" designation if a small part of the added ingredient is removed from the product recipe, despite the fact the product still includes levels of added ingredients (i.e., sugar, fat, salt) considered to be excessive. This research demonstrates that such products, termed better for you by food marketers, are not necessarily good for you, at least according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' food rating system.
It is important to note that self-regulation has exerted a significantly less positive impact on Spanish-language food marketing to children than on English-language food advertising. Figure 2 presents an evaluation of the nutritional quality of foods marketed to children solely by companies participating in industry self-regulation. That analysis demonstrates that Spanish-language advertising includes a higher proportion of food ads promoting products in the poorest nutritional category (78.2%), that proved marginally significant as compared with English-language food advertising (68.5%) delivered by the same companies. Similarly, Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative participants devote a greater proportion of their advertising in English to products for moderately nutritious Slow foods (31.0%), as compared with their advertising to children in Spanish (20.7%). Pledge companies rarely marketed genuinely healthy Go products on either Spanish- or English-language children's programming.

Other Advertising Tactics
The present study also compared the frequency of various advertising tactics in Spanishand English-language commercials. The presence of licensed characters in food ads

Food Marketing to Children

1093

Figure 2. Comparisons of nutritional quality in food ads for pledge companies by program language. Comparisons across language approached but did not achieve statistical significance. Whoa comparison z=1.78, p=.07. Slow comparison z=-1.91, p=.06. (Color figure available online.)
was similar across the two environments (16.4% of ads in Spanish vs. 15.7% of ads in English), as was the use of premiums (16.4% of ads in Spanish vs. 18.2% in English). However, significant differences were observed in the use of contests (14.0% of ads in Spanish vs. 8.2% in English) and the presence of website promotions in food ads (66.1% of ads in Spanish vs. 57.1% in English). Although Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative guidelines state that licensed characters may be used in food marketing to children solely for healthier food products, our data indicate that a disparity exists in Spanish-language food marketing to children. More than three quarters of all Spanish-language food ads (77.8%) that feature licensed characters popular with children promote products in the poorest nutritional category, known as Whoa foods, compared with 49.4% for English-language advertising.
Discussion
Despite the fact that Latino children are at greater risk of childhood obesity, past research on televised food marketing to children has largely overlooked the possibility of ethnic targeting of obesogenic food products to Spanish-speaking youth. This study provides clear evidence of significant disparities in the food advertising targeted at Spanish-speaking children. Food advertising to children on Spanish-language television includes a higher proportion of foods in the poorest nutritional category, as compared with English-language ads, with nearly seven of every eight food and beverage products (84.2%) classified as items that are not part of a healthy diet, and thus should be consumed only on special occasions (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2005). Nearly half (46.2%) of Spanish-language food advertising to children promotes fast food restaurants, a rate that is significantly higher than that found in English-language advertising. The stability of that pattern is confirmed by a previous study that found that 46.7% of Spanish-language food advertising during weekday afternoons and Saturday mornings was devoted to fast foods (Bell et al., 2009).
Concern about ethnic disparity is also raised by the finding that industry selfregulation has been less effective at improving the nutritional quality of foods marketed

1094

D. Kunkel et al.

to children in Spanish-language advertising versus English-language advertising. The Children's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative claims that its participating companies limit food marketing to children to healthier products. Previous research (Kunkel et al., 2009) demonstrates the shortcomings of self-regulation in Englishlanguage advertising, with more than two of every three food ads from pledge companies (68.5%) found to promote products in the poorest nutritional category. Even more troubling is the finding from the current study which indicates that a significantly higher proportion of Spanish-language food ads targeted at children by pledge companies (78.2%) feature foods in the lowest nutritional category.
Other evidence of disparities in advertising practices include the finding that food ads targeted at Spanish-speaking youth are more likely to include website promotions, directing children to advergames and other entertainment activities that promote unhealthy food products; and the finding that licensed characters are more likely to promote poor nutritional quality foods in Spanish as compared with Englishlanguage food advertising to children. Together, these results suggest substantial cause for concern. Given that food marketing to children is a factor known to contribute to childhood obesity rates, the ethnic disparity in current marketing practices is of significant consequence. Numerous indicators all align to show that Spanish-language food advertising to children places greater emphasis on low-nutrient, high-calorie food products than advertising on English-language television.
It must be noted that the overall presence of food advertising is significantly lower in Spanish-language as compared with English-language children's programming. Our data indicate an average of 2.2 food ads per hour appear in the Spanish-language environment, a finding corroborated by Thompson and colleagues (2008), who reported an average of 2.5 food ads per hour during weekday hours of 3:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., when many children are viewing television. Although this rate of food advertising is far below the average of 7.6 food ads per hour in English-language children's programming (Kunkel et al., 2009), there is an important counterpoint to consider. It is well established that Latino youth spend significantly more time viewing television than do same-aged White youth (Graves, 2007; Nyberg, Ramirez, & Gallion, 2011b; Rideout et al., 2010). Thus, Latino children who watch Spanish-language television may see as many ads for nutritionally poor food products as White children in their cumulative viewing, and in any case, are certainly exposed to a higher concentration of unhealthy food ads as compared with most White children.
The White House Task Force on Childhood Obesity (2010) recently recommended that the food industry accomplish significant reductions in the advertising of nonnutritious foods to children, and also achieve "substantial yearly increases" in the proportion of healthy food and beverage advertisements (p. 33). The specific target is that within 3 years, the majority of food and beverage ads directed to children should promote healthy foods. This study demonstrates how far the industry has yet to go to realize these goals in all food advertising to children. But most important, it also underscores that Spanish-language food marketing to children poses the greatest cause for concern.
References
Bell, R. A., Cassady, D., Culp, J., & Alcalay, R. (2009). Frequency and types of foods advertised on Saturday morning and weekday afternoon English- and Spanish-language American television programs. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 41, 406-413.
Bethell, C., Simpson, L., Stumbo, S., Carle, A., & Gombojav, N. (2010). National, state, and local disparities in childhood obesity. Health Affairs, 29, 347-356.

Food Marketing to Children

1095

Bickham, D., Vandewater, E., Huston, A., Lee, J., Caplovitz, A., & Wright, J. (2003). Predictors of children's electronic media use: An examination of three ethnic groups. Media Psychology, 5, 107-137.
Calvert, S. (2008). Children as consumers: Advertising and marketing. The Future of Children, 18, 205-234.
Coffey, A. J., & Sanders, A. K. (2010). Defining a product market for Spanish-language broadcast media: Lessons from United States v. Univision Broadcasting, Inc. and Hispanic Broadcasting. Communication Law and Policy, 15, 55-89.
Graves, S. B. (2007). Ethnicity, race, and media. In J. J. Arnett (Ed.), Encyclopedia of children, adolescents, and the media (pp. 299-300). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Grier, S. (2009). African American and Hispanic youth vulnerability to target marketing: Implications for understanding the effects of digital marketing. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Media Studies Group.
Grier, S., & Kumanyika, S. (2010). Targeted marketing and public health. Annual Review of Public Health, 31, 349-369.
Harris, J., Weinberg, M., Schwartz, M., Ross, C., Ostroff, J., & Brownell, K. (2011). Trends in television food advertising: Progress in reducing unhealthy marketing to young people? New Haven, CT: Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity, Yale University. Retrieved from http://yaleruddcenter.org/resources/upload/docs/what/reports/RuddReport_TVFoodAdvertising_6.11.pdf
Institute of Medicine. (2006). Food marketing to children: Threat or opportunity? Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2004). The role of media in childhood obesity. Menlo Park, CA: Author.
Kimbro, R., Brook-Gunn, J., & McLanahan, S. (2007). Racial and ethnic differences in overweight and obesity among three-year-old children. American Journal of Public Health, 97, 298-305.
Kunkel, D., McKinley, C., & Wright, P. (2009). The impact of industry self-regulation on the nutritional quality of foods advertised on television to children. Oakland, CA: Children Now.
Kunkel, D., Wilcox, B., Cantor, J., Palmer, E., Linn, S., & Dowrick, P. (2004). Psychological issues in the increasing commercialization of childhood. Report of the APA Task Force on Advertising and Children. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Larson, N., & Story, M. (2008, October). Food and beverage marketing to children and adolescents: What changes are needed to promote healthy eating habits? Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Moran, K. (2007). The growth of Spanish-language and Latino-themed television programs for children in the United States. Journal of Children and Media, 1, 294-300.
National Council of Better Business Bureaus. (2007, July 18). Better Business Bureau announces food and beverage advertising commitments from 11 industry leaders. Press release. Arlington, VA: Council of Better Business Bureaus, Inc. Retrieved from http://www.bbb.org/us/ article/better-business-bureau-announces-food-and-beverage-advertising-commitmentsfrom-11-industry-leaders-723
Nyberg, K., Ramirez, A., & Gallion, K. (2011a). Addressing nutrition, overweight and obesity among Latino youth. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.rwjf.org/pr/product.jsp?id=73674
Nyberg, K., Ramirez, A., & Gallion, K. (2011b). Influence of media on overweight and obesity among Latino youth. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.rwjf.org/pr/product.jsp?id=73673
Ogden, C., Carroll, M., & Flegal, K. (2008). High body mass index for age among U.S. children and adolescents, 2003-2006. JAMA, 299, 2401-2405.
Palmer, E., & Carpenter, C. (2006). Food and beverage marketing to children and youth: Trends and issues. Media Psychology, 8, 165-190.

1096

D. Kunkel et al.

Peeler, L., Kolish, E., & Enright, M. (2009, October). The Children's Food and Beverage Initiative in action: A report on compliance and implementation during 2008. Arlington, VA: Council of Better Business Bureaus.
Powell, L., Szczypka, G., Chaloupka, F. (2011). Trends in exposure to television food advertisements among children and adolescents in the United States. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 164, 1-9.
Rideout, V. J., Foehr, U. G., & Roberts, D. F. (2010). Generation M2: Media in the lives of 8- to 18-year-olds. Menlo Park, CA: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Stitt, C., & Kunkel, D. (2008). Food advertising during children's television programming on broadcast and cable channels. Health Communication, 23, 573-584.
Thompson, D., Flores, G., Ebel, B., & Christakis, D. (2008). Comida en venta: After-school advertising on Spanish-language television in the United States. Journal of Pediatrics, 152, 576-581.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2006). Hispanics in the United States. 2006. Retrieved from http://www. census.gov/population/www/socdemo/hispanic/files/Internet_Hispanic_in_US_2006.pdf
U.S. Census Bureau. (2008). American Community Survey, B16003: Age by language spoken at home by ability to speak English for the population 5 years and over. Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2011/tables/11s0232.xls
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2005). Ways to enhance children's activity and nutrition. Retrieved from http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/obesity/wecan
White House Task Force on Childhood Obesity. (2010). Solving the problem of childhood obesity within a generation. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President of the United States.
Yancey, A. K., Cole, B. L., Brown, R., Williams, J. D., Hillier, A., Kline, R. S., ... William, J. (2009). A cross-sectional prevalence study of ethnically targeted and general audience outdoor obesity-related advertising. Milbank Quarterly, 87, 155-184.

Copyright of Journal of Health Communication is the property of Routledge and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

