Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2009, Vol. 96, No. 3, 653- 664

(c) 2009 American Psychological Association 0022-3514/09/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0012966

Theorizing Gender in the Face of Social Change: Is There Anything Essential About Essentialism?

Thomas A. Morton
University of Exeter

Tom Postmes
University of Groningen

S. Alexander Haslam
University of Exeter

Matthew J. Hornsey
University of Queensland

The authors examine how beliefs about the stability of the social hierarchy moderate the link between sexism and essentialist beliefs about gender and how the expression of essentialist beliefs might reciprocally affect the social structure. Studies 1 (N  240) and 2 (N  143) presented gender-based inequality as stable, changing, or changed. In both studies, sexism was positively associated with essentialism only among men and only when inequality was presented as changing. Study 3 (N  552) explored the possible consequences of expressing essentialist theories for social change. Exposure to essentialist theories increased both men's and women's acceptance of inequality. Exposure further increased men's support for discriminatory practices and boosted their self-esteem. These patterns demonstrate that although essentialism is linked to prejudice, this link is itself not essential. Rather, essentialism may be invoked strategically to protect higher status when this is threatened by change and may be successful in so doing.
Keywords: essentialism, sexism, social stability, social change, discrimination

Speaking at a conference on workplace diversity, Lawrence Summers, then president of Harvard, broached the subject of why so few women are represented at the top levels in science and engineering (Summers, 2005). He identified three explanations: differences in the desire to pursue high-power occupations, differences in the experience of discrimination, and innate differences between the sexes. Controversially, Summers argued that "in the special case of science and engineering, there are issues of intrinsic aptitude. . .[and] those considerations are reinforced by what are in fact lesser factors involving socialization and continuing discrimination" (Summers, 2005, para. 6). These comments triggered a wave of criticism and calls for his resignation.
Controversies like this illustrate that such "essentialist" positions about gender differences are routinely associated with sexism. Indeed, previous research has linked essentialist beliefs to
Thomas A. Morton and S. Alexander Haslam, School of Psychology, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom; Tom Postmes, Department of Psychology, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Matthew J. Hornsey, School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia.
This research was supported by Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) Grant RES 062-23-0108 to Thomas A. Morton and Tom Postmes and by Egenis (the ESRC Centre for Genomics in Society).
Thanks to Chris Duke, Sarah Esposo, Daniel Healy, and Sita Loi for help with data collection. Thanks to Michelle Ryan and the participants of the 8th Jena Workshop on Intergroup Processes for helpful comments on earlier versions.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Thomas A. Morton, School of Psychology, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QG, United Kingdom. E-mail: T.Morton@exeter.ac.uk

various forms of prejudice. Unlike past research that emphasizes the perceptual effects of essentialism, our research explores the strategic functions of essentialism within intergroup contexts. Specifically, we test the prediction that prejudiced members of a high-status group essentialize intergroup differences when their advantage is threatened by changes to the status quo, and conversely that they are more likely to disavow essentialism when the status quo is secure or when it has changed. We also consider the social consequences that might follow when such ideas are publicly expressed.
Lay Theories and Intergroup Attitudes
Beliefs about biological determination are one example of essentialist lay theories--that is, positions that attribute difference to stable, immutable, and inherent causes (N. Haslam, Rothschild, & Ernst, 2000). That essentialist lay theories can have consequences for intergroup relations is not a new insight. Allport (1954) linked thinking about social categories in terms of naturalized essences to the prejudiced personality. More recently, research by Yzerbyt and colleagues has demonstrated that perceivers account for the superficial similarity of highly entitative social groups by inferring the existence of an underlying essence (Yzerbyt, Corneille, & Estrada, 2001; see also Yzerbyt, Estrada, Corneille, Seron, & Demoulin, 2004; Yzerbyt, Rocher, & Schadron, 1997). Such essences can reflect biological concepts (e.g., blood, genes, etc.), or they can be more diffuse and mysterious to the perceiver (Demoulin, Leyens, & Yzerbyt, 2006). Once essences are inferred they become powerful explanations for group behavior, encouraging perceivers to focus on dispositional causes rather than situational constraints (Yzerbyt, Rogier, & Fiske, 1998).

653

654 MORTON, POSTMES, HASLAM, AND HORNSEY

A similar pattern emerges from research that has focused on individual differences in the tendency to view human nature as fixed versus malleable (see Plaks, Levy, Dweck, & Stroessner, 2004, for a review). People who view human nature as fixed ("entity theorists") tend to approach groups as if they are internally homogenous and distinct from other groups and to explain group behavior in terms of the dispositional qualities of its members rather than situational constraints (Levy & Dweck, 1999; Levy, Stroessner, & Dweck, 1998). Entity theorists also endorse stereotypes more strongly (Levy et al., 1998) and avoid information that might challenge stereotypes (Plaks, Stroessner, Dweck, & Sherman, 2001). In short, entity theorists are essentialists (Bastian & Haslam, 2006). Consequently, entity theorists display more bias in intergroup settings and resist interventions designed to reduce such bias (e.g., Hong et al., 2004).
Accumulated research, therefore, suggests that essentialist thinking might have negative implications for intergroup behavior. Indeed, Keller (2005) demonstrated reliable associations between belief in biological determinism and prejudice, stereotyping, and an array of motivational variables associated with these, including indicators of system justification, need for cognitive closure, and fear of death (see also Brescoll & LaFrance, 2004; Dar-Nimrod & Heine, 2006; Martin & Parker, 1995). On the basis of these patterns, Keller (2005) concluded that "psychological essentialism is one central basis for the formation and endorsement of stereotypes and prejudice" (p. 699). Thus, contemporary research bears out Allport's contention that essentialism is part-and-parcel of a prejudiced worldview.
Essentialism in Use
Despite this apparent consensus, there is evidence for more complex patterns of essentialism. For one thing, essentialist arguments routinely appear in contexts that have little to do with prejudice. For example, some homosexuals have promoted an essentialist view of sexuality as biologically determined as a means of challenging their stigmatization. Indeed, research on heterosexuals' attitudes reveals that aspects of essentialism are associated with tolerance toward homosexuals (N. Haslam, Rothschild, & Ernst, 2002; N. Haslam & Levy, 2006; Hegarty & Pratto, 2001). Similarly, although Nazi persecution of Jews is the prototypical example of essentialism in the service of intergroup hostility (Keller, 2005), contemporary Jews can sometimes be drawn to biological concepts to assert their identity (Tenenbaum & Davidman, 2007). Apparently, essentialism does not always equal prejudice.
The potential for a more complex relationship between prejudice and essentialism has been alluded to by some theorists (N. Haslam, Bastian, & Bissett, 2004; Plaks et al., 2004; Yzerbyt et al., 2004; see also Castano, Sacchi, & Gries, 2003). To date, however, only a handful of studies suggest that the prejudice- essentialism link might be contingent on other factors. For example, Hegarty (2002) found that beliefs about the immutability of sexuality predicted tolerant attitudes, but only among those who had on a separate occasion judged immutability beliefs to be typical of tolerant people. In a discursive study, Verkuyten (2003) found that minorities tended to essentialize culture in response to talk of assimilation but de-essentialized culture in response to issues of discrimination. Conversely, majorities tended to essentialize cul-

tural differences to justify discrimination but de-essentialized these to argue against multiculturalism (see also Verkuyten & Brug, 2004). Similarly, research by Morton, Hornsey, and Postmes (in press) demonstrated that although prejudiced Whites typically essentialized race, this was not always the case. When racial criteria could be used to exclude them, prejudiced Whites emphasized the value of equality and de-essentialized race.
Our Perspective
Together, these studies suggest that identity motives guide the expression of prejudice via essentialism. These motivations seem to extend beyond the rationalization of inequality or justification of prejudice. Essentialist ideas can also be deployed as arguments for or against unequal treatment of social groups. Thus, although essentialism may often be linked to prejudice in a general sense (N. Haslam et al., 2002; Keller, 2005), this link may be less automatic than is often assumed. To develop a more complete appreciation of the role of essentialism in intergroup contexts, it is important to identify the contexts in which essentialism is linked to prejudice and the contexts in which this link disappears or changes. This is the primary aim of the current research.
In the present research, we explore how the meaning of essentialism varies as a function of (a) individual differences in prejudice and (b) the stability of the status hierarchy. Briefly, we argue that when people make statements about the causes of intergroup difference, their prejudices (or lack thereof) interact with perceived status relations between groups in society. Specifically, prejudiced members of a high-status group are likely to essentialize intergroup differences when the status quo is under threat, but they are more likely to disavow essentialism when the status quo is secure or when it has changed. Thus identity motives, triggered by perceptions of the status hierarchy, might guide the expression of prejudice through essentialist beliefs. In Studies 1 and 2 we tested the prediction that essentialist beliefs might be mobilized to protect and enforce status when systems of inequality are undergoing change and when one views such change from a position of threatened advantage. When expressed, beliefs about the essential nature of intergroup differences should have consequences not just for individual perceivers, but also for the intergroup relations that they describe. We tested this prediction in Study 3. We elaborate on these predictions in the studies that follow.
Study 1
Some current theorizing about essentialism, informed by system-justification theory (Jost & Banaji, 1994), argues that one function of essentialist beliefs might be to rationalize inequality (Keller, 2005; Yzerbyt et al., 1997). For example, Yzerbyt et al. (1997) predicted that "the more members of certain categories find themselves in a dominant position or in what appears to be a legitimate system, the more they embrace an essentialistic view about the social system" (p. 44). According to the same perspective, those most disadvantaged by the social system should be equally motivated to rationalize their positions (Jost, Pelham, Sheldon, & Sullivan, 2003), something that can also be achieved through essentialist ideas (Keller, 2005). This suggests that essentialism would be a feature of (dominant and subordinate) groups embedded within stable social systems.

ESSENTIALISM AND SOCIAL CHANGE

655

However, essentialist beliefs might not always be equally attractive as rationalizations for inequality. Instead, they might be mobilized particularly when the status hierarchy is threatened, and particularly by those who are advantaged by that hierarchy. Social identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1979) predicts that high-status groups become motivated to enforce their higher status when it is likely to be challenged--for example, when high status is perceived to be illegitimate (Hornsey, Spears, Cremers, & Hogg, 2003) or when status is threatened by the possibility for social change (Ellemers, van Knippenberg, & Wilke, 1990). This may be reflected in explicit intergroup conflict or in the promotion of ideologies that defend in-group superiority and promote out-group inferiority (S. A. Haslam, 2004). When status is secure, members of high-status groups may instead behave with magnanimity toward lower status out-groups (e.g., Nadler, 2002) or attempt to obscure intergroup distinctions to undermine the perception that their privilege stems from group membership rather than from individual abilities or effort (Branscombe, 1998; see also Saguy, Dovidio, & Pratto, 2008). Thus, high-status group members might be drawn to essentialism to consolidate intergroup boundaries and solidify status positions when their higher status is threatened by social change, but avoid essentialism as a means of obscuring intergroup distinctions when status relations are stable and secure. This perspective suggests that essentialism would be a feature of dominant groups embedded within changing, rather than stable, social systems.
In Study 1 we examined how men's and women's support for essentialist (i.e., biological) research into gender differences, and their endorsement of essentialist theories, varied depending on whether status relations were presented as stable or changing. Consistent with a social identity approach, we expected that men (the higher status group) would endorse essentialist research and theories most strongly when their group's advantage was threatened by social change. When inequality was instead presented as stable, we did not expect men to selectively endorse essentialist research or ideas--indeed, it is possible that men would seek to obscure the group-based nature of their advantage by eschewing essentialism (e.g., Branscombe, 1998). Further, we expected these effects to be most apparent among men who were ideologically invested in gender inequality--that is, men higher in sexism. Men lower in sexism should be less invested in defending gender-based status positions when these are threatened by change.
As suggested by the system-justification approach, women (the lower status group) might also endorse essentialist ideas to rationalize their group's disadvantage. Indeed, there is evidence that women sometimes justify societal gender differentiation, even when this disadvantages their group (e.g., Jost & Burgess, 2000; see also Jackman, 1994), and that women's beliefs about inherent differences between men and women (e.g., in math ability) are correlated with the perceived legitimacy of status differentiation (Schmader, Johns, & Barquissau, 2004). In fact, systemjustification theory predicts that "members of disadvantaged groups sometimes support and justify the social order to an even greater degree [italics added] than members of advantaged groups" (Jost et al., 2003, p. 14). It further predicts that such desires are amplified when "they perceive the system to be legitimate and/or stable" (p. 15). Thus, according to this theoretical perspective, we expected that women might endorse essentialist ideas as a means of rationalizing disadvantage, particularly when

that disadvantage is presented as stable rather than changing. Again, these effects should be particularly apparent among women ideologically invested in gender inequality (Jost, Banaji, & Nosek, 2004)--for example, women who score higher on sexism toward women (e.g., Cameron, 2001). Women lower in sexism should be less invested in justifying gender-based status positions, irrespective of the prevailing social context.
Taken together, these predictions suggest a three-way interaction between participant's gender, the presentation of status differences as stable or changing, and individual differences in sexism. For men we predicted that essentialism would be correlated with sexism when gender-based status relations were presented as changing but not when they were stable. Conversely, for women we predicted that essentialism would be correlated with sexism (against women) when gender-based status relations were stable but not when they were changing.
Method
Participants
Participants were 240 students who were approached on campus at a large Australian university to participate in a survey of beliefs about gender differences. Six participants did not indicate their gender and thus were excluded from the analyses. The final sample of 234 participants ranged in age between 17 and 37 years (M  20.34 years, SD  3.45) and included 98 men and 136 women. Participants were offered no reward for participation. Unless otherwise indicated, all responses were given on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Design and Procedure
Background measures. After giving their consent and reporting demographic details, participants completed an eight-item measure of modern sexism taken from Swim, Aikin, Hall, and Hunter (1995). These items formed a reliable scale (  .80) and were combined and averaged to form a single index.
Status manipulation. Participants read an article discussing the achievements of women relative to men in society. Although the article was attributed to a recent edition of a national newspaper, it was written by the researchers. Participants read one of two versions of the article. In one condition, participants read that a recent report had revealed that inequalities between men and women were as pronounced today as they ever had been in the past (i.e., that status differences were stable). In the alternative condition, participants read that although a recent report had revealed areas in which women were still disadvantaged relative to men, there were many areas in which the gap between men and women in society was closing (i.e., that status differences were changing). Each article included examples and statistics to support its claims and was accompanied by a banner that reinforced the manipulation: "women still losing the war in the battle of the sexes" versus "women losing the battle of the sexes, but might still win the war." To further reinforce the manipulation, participants were invited to list any areas in which they thought that women were disadvantaged relative to [becoming more equal to] men. To check this manipulation, participants indicated the extent to which they agreed that "status differences between men and women are

656 MORTON, POSTMES, HASLAM, AND HORNSEY

changing" and "over time, status differences between men and women in society have decreased."
Dependent measures. Participants read a second article, attributed to a popular science magazine, that described recent research that had identified systematic differences in the genes produced in, and the outward appearance of, male and female mouse brains. The article concluded that similar differences could explain why male and female humans think and act differently. Although this article was prepared by the researchers, it was based on actual research (Dewing, Shi, Horvath, & Vilain, 2003). After reading this, participants indicated the extent to which they believed that this type of research should continue, deserved more funding, was good for society, represented the facts about gender differences, and made a major contribution to understanding human nature (Morton, Haslam, Postmes, & Ryan, 2006). These five items were combined and averaged to form a single index of participants' support for essentialist research (  .89).
Finally, two items adapted from Martin and Parker's (1995) work asked participants the extent to which they believed that differences between male and female personalities and societal achievements could be explained in terms of underlying biological differences between men and women (e.g., in terms of genes, hormones, brain structures, etc.). These items were combined into a single index of essentialist theorizing (r  .57, p  .001).
Results
Manipulation Checks
A multivariate analysis of variance conducted on the two manipulation check items revealed a main effect for experimental condition, F(2, 215)  3.80, p  .02. Relative to participants in the stable (women losing) condition, participants in the changing (women gaining) condition expressed more agreement that status differences between men and women were changing (Ms  4.88 and 5.21), F(1, 216)  6.04, p  .02, and that these differences were decreasing relative to the past (Ms  4.89 and 5.11), F(1, 216)  3.72, p  .055. These effects were not moderated by sexism or participant's gender, Fs(2, 215)  2.49, ps  .09. These findings suggest that the manipulation successfully influenced participants' beliefs about whether status differences between men and women were stable or changing.
Primary Analyses
In a series of hierarchical regression analyses, participant's gender (male  0 and female  1), experimental condition (stable  0 and changing  1), and measured sexism (centered) were entered at Step 1, followed by all possible two-way interactions at Step 2 and the three-way interaction at Step 3. Significant interaction terms were explored following recommendations by Aiken and West (1991).
In the analysis predicting essentialist theorizing, the only step to contribute to variance explained was the final step in which the three-way interaction was tested, R2  .02, F(1, 226)  6.49, p  .01. This was due to a Condition  Sexism interaction that was significant for men,   .39, t(226)  2.87, p  .005, but not for women,   .11, t(226)  0.80, p  .43. As can be seen in Figure 1, when status relations were presented as stable, sexism

Essentialist theorizing

5.5
5.0
Stable 4.5 Changing
4.0
3.5 Low High Sexism
Figure 1. Interaction between sexism and societal gender relations on men's personal endorsement of essentialist theories (Study 1).
among men was associated with marginally weaker endorsement of biological theories of gender difference,   .24, t(226)  1.71, p  .09. However, when status relations were presented as changing, this pattern reversed, and sexism was associated with stronger endorsement of biological theories of gender difference,   .29, t(226)  2.41, p  .02. Put differently, high-sexism men were significantly more likely to endorse biological theories when status relations were changing rather than fixed,   .25, t(226)  2.11, p  .04. Among low-sexism men, the opposite pattern was marginally significant,   .29, t(226)  1.78, p  .08.
In the analysis of support for essentialist research, the only step to make a significant contribution to variance explained was again the final step in which the three-way interaction was tested, R2  .02, F(1, 226)  4.92, p  .03. Once more, this was due to a Condition  Sexism interaction that was significant for men,   .38, t(226)  2.82, p  .005, but not for women,   .06, t(226)  0.39, p  .70. As can be seen in Figure 2, when status relations were presented as stable, sexism among men was associated with less support for essentialist research,   .42, t(226)  2.98, p  .003. When status relations were presented as changing, this relationship reversed, and sexism was associated with more support for the research, although this was not significant,   .11, t(226)  0.86, p  .39. Put differently, high-sexism men were somewhat more supportive of essentialist research when status relations were changing rather than fixed,   .22, t(226)  1.85, p  .07, whereas low-sexism men were somewhat more supportive of such research when status relations were fixed rather than changing,   .31, t(226)  1.92, p  .06.
Discussion
Essentialist ideas about intergroup differences are not always linked to prejudice. Rather, the relationship between sexism and essentialism is moderated by perceptions of the stability of the social hierarchy. Consistent with social identity predictions, sexism among men is related to endorsement of essentialist theories of gender difference only when gender-based status relations in society are presented as changing. When status relations are presented as stable, this does not occur, and in fact men's sexism is weakly negatively related to essentialist beliefs. A similar pattern

ESSENTIALISM AND SOCIAL CHANGE

657

Support for essentialist research

6.0
5.5
Stable 5.0 Changing
4.5
4.0 Low High Sexism
Figure 2. Interaction between sexism and societal gender relations on men's support for essentialist research (Study 1).
emerges on men's evaluations of a specific piece of essentialist science. Sexist men find this research to be of less scientific value when their group's higher status is stable. However, when status relations are presented as changing, sexist men do not reject this kind of science. Thus, sexist men give their support to biological explanations for gender difference, and research that might validate such theories, when their higher status is under threat.
This pattern suggests that essentialism might be invoked and denied strategically to manage social status. When one's higher status is stable and secure, there is no advantage to be gained through attributing intergroup differences to natural factors. Indeed, denying the role of innate differences might allow members of high-status groups to attribute their relative success to superior individual qualities (e.g., effort and ability) and thus contribute to positive self-evaluations (e.g., Branscombe, 1998). In comparison, when men are faced with challenges to their higher social status, essentialism can be a powerful argument against social change. Under such conditions, essentialism might protect members of high-status groups against feelings of threat by making social change appear less likely (e.g., Brescoll & LaFrance, 2004; Martin & Parker, 1995).
In comparison with the support for predictions about men, the pattern of results observed for women did not conform to expectations. On the basis of past theorizing (e.g., Keller, 2005; Yzerbyt et al., 1997), we expected that women, as members of a lower status group, might support essentialist ideas as a means of rationalizing disadvantage, and that this tendency would be most evident when lower status was presented as stable and among women who endorsed sexist ideologies (against women). However, among women there was no relationship between sexism and our measures of essentialism--neither as a main effect nor in interaction with the prevailing social context. This questions the straightforward interpretation of essentialism within disadvantaged groups as stemming from system-justification motives (see also Verkuyten, 2003).
Study 2
Study 1 suggests that essentialism might stem from desires to protect higher status that is threatened by social change. However,

the patterns observed in Study 1 could equally be interpreted as a response to a threat of any kind, rather than as a specific response to the threat of social change. Essentialism would then be similar to other facets of group perception that tend to be accentuated under conditions of threat--for example, perceptions of homogeneity and stereotyping (e.g., Branscombe, Wann, Noel, & Coleman, 1993; Oakes, Haslam, & Turner, 1994; Spears, Doosje, & Ellemers, 1997). To explore this possibility we conducted a second study in which we again assessed the relationship between sexism and essentialism as a function of gender group membership and the prevailing sociopolitical context. Instead of presenting gender-based status relations as stable versus changing, in this study we presented status relations as undergoing change versus as having actually changed (i.e., now favoring women).
If essentialism among men higher in sexism was a response to a status threat of any kind, there should be little difference in responses across conditions, as both conditions threaten male status. However, if essentialism stems from desires to protect higher status when it is threatened by social change, the extent to which sexism and essentialism are linked among men should vary across conditions. In one condition social change is a current threat, whereas in the other condition it is a reality that has already occurred. Just as there is little advantage to essentializing intergroup differences when one's group's advantage is secure, there is little to be gained through essentialism when that advantage is reversed. Indeed, given the implication of inherent deficiency, essentializing lower status might be avoided.
Accordingly, we expected that men's sexist attitudes would be expressed through essentialism when social change is a current possibility. When social change is instead presented as something that has already occurred, and that men are now disadvantaged, the positive relationship between sexism and essentialism should disappear. Thus, for men, we again predict a two-way interaction between sexism and social context. Given the lack of effects among women in the previous study, we did not make any predictions about their responses to anticipated versus actual social change.
Method
Participants
Participants were 143 students approached on a large university campus in the United Kingdom to participate in a survey of beliefs about gender differences. Participants were between 18 and 28 years old (M  20.14 years, SD  1.99) and were equally divided between gender groups (72 men, 71 women). Participants received a chocolate bar as thanks for their participation.
Design and Procedure
The design of this study was identical to that of Study 1 with one key alteration. Again, participants completed a measure of modern sexism (eight items;   .80) before reading one of two articles designed to influence their beliefs about gender-based status differences in society. Again, they read a second article describing recent research that had identified systematic genetic and physical differences between male and female mouse brains and that concluded that similar differences in human brains could explain why

658 MORTON, POSTMES, HASLAM, AND HORNSEY

men and women think and act differently. Participants then evaluated the research and gave their support for its continuation (support for essentialist research, five items;   .83) and indicated their belief in essentialist theories of gender differences in society (two items; r  .35, p  .001; although this correlation is moderate rather than large, the pattern of effects reported below did not differ when individual items were analyzed separately).
The key difference between the two studies was the manipulation of status. One condition was identical to the condition in the previous study in which gender-based status differences were presented as changing. In the alternative condition, participants read that, although women had experienced a relative disadvantage in the past, a recent report had revealed that in many domains the situation was now reversed, and that women enjoyed advantages over men. This article was accompanied by the banner "women winning the war in the battle of the sexes," and participants were invited to list any areas in which they thought women were now advantaged relative to men. Thus we tried to influence whether participants perceived gender-based status differences in society to be undergoing change or to have actually changed. To check the success of this manipulation, participants indicated the extent to which they agreed that "men and women are basically treated equally in society" and that "over time, status differences between men and women have mostly stayed the same" on a scale that ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Results
Manipulation Checks
Relative to the women gaining condition, participants in the women win condition were less inclined to agree that men and women were basically treated equally (Ms  4.19 and 3.93, respectively) or that gender-based status differences in society were the same as ever (Ms  3.35 and 2.73, respectively). Although this is consistent with the manipulation, neither of these trends was significant, Fs(1, 134)  1.74, ps  .19.
Instead, these patterns were moderated by the participant's gender (i.e., significant Condition  Gender interactions: Fs(1, 134)  4.10 and 3.96, ps  .05). Among men, beliefs about gender equality (Ms  4.37 and 3.73) and the extent to which the status hierarchy had not changed (Ms  4.26 and 2.68) were influenced in the direction of the manipulation, Fs(1, 134)  4.22 and 5.57, ps  .05. The manipulation did not, however, have similar effects on women, Fs(1, 134)  1, who were generally neutral about the extent to which equality had been achieved (M  4.08) and were inclined to believe that society was changing (M  2.62) regardless of the experimental condition.
These patterns suggest the success of the manipulation was limited to men. Relative to men in the changing condition, men in the changed condition perceived men and women to be less equal (reflecting the fact that men were presented as disadvantaged relative to women) and believed that the status hierarchy had changed (reflecting the fact that the manipulation emphasized that this was a reversal of what was previously true). Among women, there may have been some resistance to the suggestion that they were now in a position of relative social advantage. Indeed, reality is likely to have constrained the degree to which it was possible to manipulate status in this way, at least for women. These effects were not further moderated by measured sexism.

Primary Analyses
The primary analyses were conducted via regression to test all main effects and interactions among the variables (see Study 1). In the analysis of essentialist theorizing, there was a significant main effect of sexism at Step 1,   .23, t(137)  2.64, p  .009, R2  .08, F(3, 137)  3.88, p  .01, which was qualified by a significant three-way interaction among the variables at Step 3, R2  .04, F(1, 133)  5.82, p  .02. The three-way interaction was due to a Condition  Sexism interaction that was significant for men,   .31, t(133)  2.05, p  .04, but not for women,   .30, t(133)  1.47, p  .14. As can be seen in Figure 3, when status relations were presented as changing, sexism among men was associated with stronger endorsement of biological theories of gender difference,   .46, t(133)  2.71, p  .008. When men were instead led to believe that status relations had changed and that women were now relatively advantaged, this relationship disappeared,   .01, t(133)  0.04, p  .97. This effect was partly driven by a significant effect of condition among low- rather than high-sexism men. Low-sexism men endorsed biological theories less strongly when status relations were undergoing change rather than changed,   .44, t(133)  2.31, p  .02, whereas highsexism men were not affected by the manipulation,   .02, t(133)  0.11, p  .91.
In the analysis of participants' support for essentialist research, the only significant step in this model was the final step in which the three-way interaction was tested, R2  .03, F(1, 132)  4.86, p  .03. This was due to a Condition  Sexism interaction that was significant for men,   .35, t(132)  2.24, p  .03, but not for women,   .22, t(132)  1.06, p  .29. As can be seen in Figure 4, when status differences were presented as changing, there was a positive but nonsignificant relationship between men's sexism and their support for essentialist research,   .15, t(132)  0.86, p  .39. However, when status differences were portrayed as having changed, this relationship was reversed: Sexism was associated with significantly less support for this kind of research,   .36, t(132)  2.46, p  .02. Put differently, men who were higher in sexism were less supportive of essentialist research when gender-based status differences were presented as having actually changed rather than currently undergoing change,

5.5

Essentialist theorizing

5.0 Changing
4.5 Changed 4.0

3.5 Low

High

Sexism

Figure 3. Interaction between sexism and societal gender relations on men's personal endorsement of essentialist theories (Study 2).

ESSENTIALISM AND SOCIAL CHANGE

659

Support for essentialist research

5.0
4.5
Changing 4.0 Changed
3.5
3.0 Low High Sexism
Figure 4. Interaction between sexism and societal gender relations on men's support for essentialist research (Study 2).
  .41, t(132)  2.97, p  .004. Low-sexism men were not affected by the manipulation,   .10, t(132)  0.49, p  .62.
Discussion
This study again found that sexism was associated with less resistance to essentialist science and increased endorsement of essentialist theories of gender only among men and only when their group's high status was being threatened by social change. When men were instead asked to think about the ways in which the social structure had actually changed and the ways in which they were now disadvantaged relative to women, sexism was associated with the rejection of essentialist research and was unrelated to essentialist theorizing about gender difference. This provides further evidence that the relationship between sexism and essentialism is not stable--rather, it is limited to contexts in which traditional status advantages are diminishing.
Results are partially consistent with our reasoning that that essentialism can be a strategic response to the threat of social change, particularly among those invested in defending the status of their group (i.e., men higher in sexism). This argument is supported by participants' evaluations of essentialist science. A context of female superiority significantly reduced sexist men's enthusiasm for biological research into gender differences. However, sexist men did not show a tendency to also reject essentialist theories under these conditions.
One reason for this discrepancy may be that manipulation of changed social status necessarily made reference to men's traditional advantage as well as to women's newly acquired advantages. Although this heightened men's perception that society had changed to women's advantage, it simultaneously emphasized men's traditional "superiority." Accordingly, essentialist ideas should retain some appeal to sexist men as a means to reflect men's traditional status position. However, the manipulation also provided clear evidence that women were coming out on top, making it risky to expose those traditional assumptions about the essential superiority of men to close empirical scrutiny. Accordingly, sexist men who believed that women had successfully scaled a mountain of inequality were much less keen to support scientific

research into essentialism, apparently for fear of what this might reveal.
An unexpected finding is that the reported interactions arise from variation in the responses of both high- and low-sexism men. In Study 1, less sexist men endorsed essentialism (marginally) more strongly when women's disadvantage was stable than when it was changing. In Study 2, they were more essentialist when women's superiority had been achieved than when it was changing. In both studies, then, low-sexist men were more likely to endorse essentialist ideas when social relations were stable, having been told that "women are losing the war in the battle of the sexes" or that they are "winning" it. Low-sexist men are less likely to do so when gender-based status relations are unstable.
Less sexist men are unlikely to be invested in gendered status positions in the way that more sexist men are and are thus less likely to behave strategically in relation to these (see Morton, Postmes, & Jetten, 2007). Given this, there is logic to their pattern of responses. When gender differences are stable, less sexist men assume that there may be stable underlying causes that explain this difference (either because men are inherently superior or because women are). When gender differences are portrayed as changing, this theory becomes less plausible. Changes across time imply that forces other than inherent qualities create gender differences. Thus, less sexist men seem to be behaving as intuitive scientists: Their responses reflect the social structure in that they are more inclined to endorse essentialism when women's disadvantage is stable (whether that stability brings advantages or disadvantages to their group) and less inclined to support it when differences are portrayed as changing. In contrast, the responses of high-sexism men were in opposition to these seemingly "logical" inferences about the essence of gender differences. Instead, their reactions suggest psychological resistance to a changing social structure.
As in the previous study, women's support for essentialist science and their endorsement of essentialist theories of gender difference were not affected by the manipulation of social context. It is important to acknowledge that women's beliefs about their group's position in society, and whether this position had changed, were also not affected by the manipulation. However, this may reflect the fact that there was some resistance to the manipulation itself. Indeed, such resistance might have been expected given that the social reality of women's position in society is likely to constrain the extent to which it is possible to manipulate status relations in this way.
In this context, the success of the manipulation for men is particularly noteworthy and informative. Moreover, the effects of the manipulation for men were consistent with expectations. Male sexism was associated with essentialist theorizing only under conditions of social change, and male sexism was associated with a rejection of essentialist research under conditions of social stability, whether that stability was said to favor men (Study 1) or women (Study 2).
Study 3
In Studies 1 and 2, we argued that the appeal of essentialism might follow strategic motives related to social change. Given this, it is important to consider what the effect of promoting such ideas might be--for how people feel both about themselves and about the nature of the social hierarchy. Previous research has considered

660 MORTON, POSTMES, HASLAM, AND HORNSEY

the effects of essentialism on propensities to stereotype, irrespective of the perceiver's gender. Specifically, essentialized groups are prone to be treated as if they are more socially significant and rich in inductive potential (Rothbart & Taylor, 1992; Yzerbyt et al., 2001). If people believe that some enduring reality connects all group members, they might feel more comfortable linking broad stereotypes to group membership.
Beyond these perceptual effects, exposure to essentialist ideas about gender might have further consequences for how people respond to group-based inequality. If essentialist beliefs are expressed out of a desire to stabilize intergroup relations that are threatened by change (as suggested by Studies 1 and 2), and if essentialist beliefs about gender are associated with the immutability of social relations (Martin & Parker, 1995), then it seems likely that exposure to such thinking would be reassuring, at least for men. Moreover, essentialist notions might provide a justification for action designed to resist social change--that is, by making discrimination on the basis of gender appear more appropriate and legitimate. Thus, it seems possible that exposure to essentialist arguments might be empowering for men and encourage them to enact discrimination.
In comparison, exposure to essentialist arguments is unlikely to be empowering for women--indeed, it may be disempowering. Exposure to essentialist ideas has been found to undermine women's performance in nontraditional domains (i.e., mathematics), presumably because this renders gendered stereotypes less escapable (Dar-Nimrod & Heine, 2006). Essentialist ideas may also contribute to the perceived legitimacy of the social structure as a whole (e.g., Jost & Kay, 2005) and thus undermine tendencies to rally behind social change. Thus, in addition to increasing the tendency to stereotype across gender groups (Brescoll & LaFrance, 2004), it seems likely that exposure to biological essentialism might have more distinct effects on men and women due to their different location within the social hierarchy (Branscombe, 1998; Schmitt, Branscombe, & Kappen, 2003).
To examine these possibilities, we exposed participants to an account of how gender differences in personality and psychology might be explained in terms of evolved biological drives and provided a summary of scientific evidence supporting this position (e.g., patterns of mate preference). Participants in an alternative condition read the same account of gender differences, but this was accompanied by a summary of scientific evidence that questioned these claims (e.g., that there was considerable variability in gendered preferences across time and place). Thus, in both conditions biological concepts were equally salient; however, the conditions differed in the degree to which this type of essentialism was presented as supported fact or as part of an academic debate and open to question. We assessed orientations to inequality (both with specific reference to gender and in terms of social inequality more generally), perceived likelihood of changes to such inequality, support for discriminatory practices in the workplace, and feelings of personal self-esteem.
Our hypothesis was that presentations of essentialist claims about gender difference as fact would reinforce the social structure, rendering it more stable and more legitimate to both men and women. Among men, this should be empowering--that is, reinforcing support for discriminatory practices that maintain the status quo and contributing to personal feelings of esteem. Among women, the effect of this should be disempowering--that is,

undermining modes of thought that challenge the status quo (e.g., the perceived legitimacy and stability of the social system) and perhaps also undermining more personal feelings of self-esteem.
Method
Participants
Five hundred and fifty-two participants were recruited via an online psychology research website. Participants ranged in age from 12 to 62 years (mean age  25.04, SD  9.43). Participants were predominately female (385 were women and 167 were men), but both genders were approximately equally divided between the experimental conditions. There were 99 men in the fact condition and 68 men in the debate condition. There were 185 women in the fact condition and 200 women in the debate condition.
Design and Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions. In the fact condition, participants read a brief summary of the key arguments behind biologically based theories of gender differences in thought and behavior. They were then presented with a summary of scientific evidence that supported each of these arguments. Thus, biological theories were presented as substantiated facts. In the debate condition, participants read the same summary of this perspective along with scientific evidence that refuted each of its arguments. Thus, biological theories were presented as an object of debate within the scientific community. Responses to all subsequent questions were given on a 7-point scale that ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
After the manipulation, four items assessed participants' belief that gender differences in a range of domains (e.g., personality, social roles, social standing) could be explained by underlying biological differences between the sexes. These four items were combined and averaged and served as a check on the manipulation of essentialist theorizing about gender (  .77).
Next we measured specific and general orientations toward inequality. On three items participants indicated their belief that the treatment of men and women in society was fair and just (e.g., "The way society treats men and women is just"). These three items were combined and averaged into a single index of the perceived fairness of gender-based treatment (  .69). Three additional items measured support for social inequality based on a short version of the Social Dominance Orientation Scale (Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). Participants indicated the extent to which they agreed that "if certain groups stayed in their place, we would have fewer problems," "some groups of people are simply inferior to others," and "it's probably a good thing that certain groups are at the top and other groups are at the bottom." These three items were combined and averaged to form a composite measure of generalized support for social dominance (  .80).
Four items assessed the extent to which participants perceived that changes to the status quo were possible. For example, participants indicated their agreement that "men will always have more privileges than women" (reverse scored) or that "the relationship between men and women is likely to change." These four items were combined to form a single index of perceived possibility for social change (  .65).

ESSENTIALISM AND SOCIAL CHANGE

661

On an additional four items, participants indicated their support for discriminatory practices--for example, "If I would work in a company where my manager preferred hiring men to women, I would privately support him" and "If I were a manager in a company myself, I would believe that more often than not, promoting men is a better investment in the future of the company than promoting women." These items were combined and averaged to form a single index (  .75).
Finally, participants completed a short version of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965). Five items asked participants the extent to which they agreed with statements like "I am able to do things as well as most other people" and "I take a positive attitude towards myself" versus statements like "I wish I could have more respect for myself," "I certainly feel useless at times," and "At times I think I am no good at all." After reversescoring the last three items, these items were combined and averaged into a single index on which higher scores represented more positive feelings of self-esteem (  .82).
Results
We conducted a 2 (condition: debate, fact)  2 (gender: male, female) multivariate analysis of variance on the dependent measures. Means and standard deviations are displayed in Table 1. Although main effects of gender are not of theoretical interest in the current article, it should be noted that men and women differed on essentialist beliefs, F(1, 543)  4.87, p  .03, perceived fairness of gendered treatment, F(1, 543)  24.54, p  .001, social dominance, F(1, 543)  16.80, p  .001, perceived possibility for social change, F(1, 543)  5.39, p  .02, and support for discrimination, F(1, 543)  40.58, p  .001. Compared to women, men were more likely to believe biological theories of gender, view the treatment of men and women in society as fair, support social dominance more generally, perceive social change to be possible, and support discriminatory practices. The only measure on which men and women did not differ was self-esteem, F  1.
Beyond these gender differences, there were also effects of condition across all measures: for essentialist beliefs, F(1, 543)  6.35, p  .01; for perceived fairness of gendered treatment, F(1, 543)  7.44, p  .007; for social dominance, F(1, 543)  3.37, p  .07; for perceived possibility for social change, F(1, 543)  14.85, p  .001; for support for discrimination, F(1, 543)  3.63, p  .057; and for self-esteem, F(1, 543)  7.58, p  .006. Compared to participants in the debate condition, participants in the fact condition were more likely to endorse biological theories

of gender difference (the manipulation check). Participants in the debate condition were also more likely to view the treatment of men and women in society as fair, support social dominance (marginal), perceive social change to be less likely, support discriminatory practices (marginal), and report high self-esteem.
Finally, there were significant Gender  Condition interactions on perceived fairness of gendered treatment, F(1, 543)  4.10, p  .04; support for discrimination, F(1, 543)  4.70, p  .03; and reported self-esteem, F(1, 543)  8.37, p  .004. Each of these interactions was due to an effect of the manipulation among men. Relative to men in the debate condition, men in the fact condition viewed the treatment of men and women in society to be fairer, F(1, 543)  8.02, p  .005; were more likely to support genderbased discrimination, F(1, 543)  5.89, p  .02; and reported higher self-esteem, F(1, 543)  11.32, p  .001. Women's responses on these measures were not affected by the manipulation, Fs  1.
Discussion
Consistent with predictions, the results of this study show that exposure to essentialist ideas about gender might contribute to the perceived legitimacy of social inequality in a general sense (as reflected by support for social dominance) and make social change appear less likely. Among men--the group advantaged by that social structure--the more specific consequence of this was increased support for discriminatory practices that disadvantaged women, a perception that societal treatment of men and women is fair, and heightened feelings of personal self-esteem. In short, exposure to essentialist ideas was empowering for men.
In contrast, there was some, albeit weaker, evidence that exposure to essentialist ideas was socially disempowering for women. Exposure to essentialism was associated with higher acceptance of social dominance (i.e., the belief that inequality is legitimate) and perceptions that changes to the social structure were less likely. Although these effects were equally apparent among men and women, the consequences of such perceptions are likely to be negative for women (Branscombe, 1998). Perceiving inequality to be illegitimate and change to be possible are important precursors to thought and action designed to resist inequality (Ellemers, Wilke, & van Knippenberg, 1993; S. A. Haslam & Reicher, 2006; Tajfel & Turner, 1979). In the present study we did not find evidence that essentialism was also personally disempowering, through undermining women's feelings of self-esteem. It may be that the esteem-related consequences of essentialism for women

Table 1 Study 3: Means (and Standard Deviations) for Men and Women in the Debate and Fact Conditions

Men Women

Dependent measure

Debate Fact Debate Fact

Essentialist beliefs Social dominance Possibility of social change Fairness of gendered treatment Discrimination support Self-esteem

3.75 (1.34) 2.44 (1.61) 5.35 (1.22) 3.48 (1.37) 2.03 (1.06) 4.49 (1.42)

4.08 (1.18) 2.77 (1.54) 4.80 (1.21) 4.00 (1.13) 2.38 (1.19) 5.20 (1.18)

3.53 (1.21) 1.99 (1.29) 4.97 (1.20) 3.16 (1.18) 1.66 (.81) 4.94 (1.39)

3.79 (1.28) 2.14 (1.35) 4.67 (1.07) 3.24 (1.08) 1.64 (.82) 4.95 (1.30)

662 MORTON, POSTMES, HASLAM, AND HORNSEY

are not felt on global evaluations but on more domain-specific evaluations (e.g., traditional versus nontraditional). Future research is needed to further clarify the consequences of essentialism and related ideologies for women and other disadvantaged groups, both politically and personally.
The results of this study are particularly interesting in light of the previous studies. Studies 1 and 2 showed that, when confronted with the threat of social change, men higher in sexism became more responsive to essentialist science and more likely to endorse essentialist theories about gender difference. Study 3 shows that, to the extent that these ideas are then expressed, men become more inclined to discriminate and women may become less convinced of the potential for social change. This dynamic and reciprocal relationship between essentialism and the social structure highlights the importance of seeing essentialism as more than an aspect of individual psychology. It can also be a tool through which social inequality is maintained.
General Discussion
From Allport's (1954) comments about the role of essencerelated beliefs in the prejudiced personality to present-day research on essentialism, a consistent message has emerged. This message suggests that psychological essentialism contributes to negative intergroup attitudes and negative intergroup behaviors (e.g., Brescoll & LaFrance, 2004; N. Haslam et al., 2002; Keller, 2005; Martin & Parker, 1995; Plaks et al., 2004). In line with suggestions that the relationship between essentialism and prejudice might be rather less straightforward (Hegarty, 2002; Verkuyten, 2003), the present research points to a strategic use of essentialism within debates about inequality. Our data suggest that the desire to essentialize intergroup differences--for example, by attributing these to stable biological causes--varies according to the implications of essentialism for the individual within their specific social context. As such, there are conditions under which prejudice and essentialism are likely to be positively linked and contexts in which such a link is likely to disappear or indeed reverse.
In support of this perspective, the relationship between sexism and essentialism varied across gender groups and across social contexts. Among men, sexism was linked to essentialist theorizing only when they considered the ways in which society was changing and women's status was improving (Studies 1 and 2). When men focused on the ways in which female disadvantage has been stable across time, the positive relationship between sexism and essentialism disappeared, and in some cases reversed (Study 1). When men focused on areas in which they might be disadvantaged relative to women, the positive relationship between sexism and essentialism also disappeared (Study 2). In short, sexism seems most likely to be expressed through essentialism when social change threatens one's group's current advantages.
These findings demonstrate that neither higher status (Mahalingam, 2003) nor individual differences in prejudice (e.g., N. Haslam et al., 2002; Keller, 2005) alone explain tendencies to essentialize intergroup differences. A more dynamic process seems to be at play. In the studies reported here, essentialist beliefs were invoked and denied, and scientific research into such ideas was supported and rejected, as a means of managing threats to higher status among men who were invested in gender inequality (i.e.,

higher in sexism). This suggests a strategic, or political, essentialism (Stoler, 1997).
Complementing these findings, Study 3 demonstrates that invoking essentialist ideas is likely to pay off, at least from the perspective of men as a group. Exposure to biological theories about gender difference (in personality, preference, and behavior) increased men's support for discriminatory practices, led them to see gendered treatment as more appropriate, and contributed to personal feelings of self-esteem. Essentialism empowered men and encouraged them to think and act in ways that enforced their higher status. Furthermore, for both men and women, exposure to biological theories about gender difference increased the acceptance of social inequality (i.e., higher social dominance) and made social change appear less likely. Thus, in addition to increasing individual tendencies to stereotype (e.g., Brescoll & LaFrance, 2004; Levy et al., 1998), exposure to essentialist accounts of intergroup difference can also help preserve the existing social hierarchy.
The present research highlights the importance of taking a more nuanced approach to studying essentialism. Essentialism is not just a belief that people hold in and of themselves. Essentialism is also an argument or idea that is expressed in the context of specific debates over inequality. A lack of attention to such contexts might explain some of the conflicting results in previous research. That is, although essentialism is generally related to negative intergroup behaviors, both essentialist and anti-essentialist beliefs have been found to relate to individual prejudice (e.g., N. Haslam et al., 2002; Hegarty & Pratto, 2001). These divergent patterns might be better understood by considering who is essentializing who, under what conditions, and to what ends (Morton et al., in press). The conditional relationships observed in Studies 1 and 2 suggest that different motives guide essentialism in different contexts. It would be interesting for future research to explore these possibilities in intergroup settings other than gender.
In contrast to the results for men, among women, the relationships among sexism, support for essentialist science, and essentialist theorizing were generally weak and unresponsive to context. Given the unclear pattern of results for women, future research could consider alternative determinants of essentialist thinking among women and other disadvantaged groups. Past research has tended to explain minority groups' support for essentialist ideas in terms of system justification (Keller, 2005; Yzerbyt et al., 1997). However, there was no support for this prediction in the present research. For example, women who scored highly on a measure of sexism against women, and who should be more invested in or accepting of gender inequality (Cameron, 2001), were no more likely to endorse essentialist ideas when contemplating the stable disadvantages faced by their group in society, as might be expected from a system-justification perspective.
Although it goes beyond the data presented here, it is possible that essentialist thinking among disadvantaged groups is more complex than is often suggested in the literature. Essentialism can have multiple meanings from a minority perspective. On the one hand, essentialism can rationalize and justify inequality, but it might also serve progressive purposes such as creating solidarity or demanding recognition (Verkuyten, 2003). If this is true, minorities might avoid essentialism in intergroup contexts where it might invite discrimination but be more likely to endorse it in intragroup contexts as a means of fostering solidarity (Kelly, 1989;

ESSENTIALISM AND SOCIAL CHANGE

663

Oakes et al., 1994; Simon & Brown, 1987). This suggestion of a strategic essentialism among minorities vis-a-vis different audiences remains to be tested in future research.
The present research sought to reexamine the link between essentialism and prejudice by considering how prejudice might be expressed through essentialist ideas, and support for essentialist science, in different contexts. Consistent with past research, there were some positive associations between sexism and essentialism and evidence that essentialism had negative implications for intergroup behavior. However, the positive link between prejudice and essentialism emerged only when the dominant group was threatened by the prospect of social change. When the dominant group's privileged status was described as secure (Study 1) or recently inverted (Study 2), either this positive relationship disappeared, or negative relationships between prejudice and indicators of essentialism emerged (i.e., on evaluations of science that might substantiate such an account of gender difference). Our analysis points to the importance of social context in explaining this variability--in particular, the extent to which intergroup relations are viewed from above or below (Branscombe, 1998; Schmitt et al., 2003) and whether or not these status differences are perceived to be stable or changing. Furthermore, Study 3 showed that essentialist arguments can lead to attitudes and ideologies that help preserve the status quo. To develop a complete social psychological account of what essentialism is and what it does, future research needs to integrate past insights into the perceptual effects of essentialism with an appreciation of how essentialism is used by groups to argue for or against particular visions of intergroup relations.
References
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Allport, G. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Bastian, B., & Haslam, N. ( 2006). Psychological essentialism and stereotype endorsement. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 228 - 235.
Branscombe, N. R. (1998). Thinking about one's gender group's privileges or disadvantages: Consequences for well-being in women and men. British Journal of Social Psychology, 37, 167-184.
Branscombe, N. R., Wann, D., Noel, J., & Coleman, J. (1993). In-group or out-group extremity: Importance of threatened social identity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 381-388.
Brescoll, V., & LaFrance, M. (2004). The correlates and consequences of newspaper reports of research on sex difference. Psychological Science, 15, 515-520.
Cameron, J. E. (2001). Social identity, modern sexism, and perceptions of personal and group discrimination by women and men. Sex Roles, 45, 743-766.
Castano, E., Sacchi, S., & Gries, P. H. (2003). The perception of the Other in international relations: Evidence for the polarizing effect of entitativity. Political Psychology, 24, 449 - 468.
Dar-Nimrod, I., & Heine, S. J. (2006). Exposure to scientific theories affects women's math performance. Science, 314, 435.
Demoulin, S., Leyens, J.-P., & Yzerbyt, V. (2006). Lay theories of essentialism. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 9, 25- 42.
Dewing, P., Shi, P., Horvath, S., & Vilain, E. (2003). Sexually dimorphic gene expression in mouse brain precedes gonadal differentiation, Molecular Brain Research, 118, 82-90.
Ellemers, N., van Knippenberg, A., & Wilke, H. (1990). The influence of permeability of group boundaries and stability of group status on strat-

egies of social mobility and social change. British Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 233-246. Ellemers, N., Wilke, H., & van Knippenberg, A. (1993). Effects of legitimacy of low group or individual status on individual and collective status enhancement strategies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 766 -778. Haslam, N., Bastian, B., & Bissett, M. (2004). Essentialist beliefs about personality and their implications. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1661-1673. Haslam, N., & Levy, S. (2006). Essentialist beliefs about homosexuality: Structure and implications for prejudice. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 471- 485. Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist beliefs about social categories. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 113-127. Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2002). Are essentialist beliefs associated with prejudice? British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 87-100. Haslam, S. A. (2004). Psychology in organizations: The social identity approach (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Haslam, S. A., & Reicher, S. D. (2006). Stressing the group: Social identity and the unfolding dynamics of responses to stress. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 1037-1052. Hegarty, P. (2002). "It's not a choice, it's the way we're built": Symbolic beliefs about sexual orientation in the U.S. and Britain. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 12, 153-166. Hegarty, P., & Pratto, F. (2001). Sexual orientation beliefs: Their relationship to antigay attitudes and biological determinist arguments. Journal of Homosexuality, 41, 121-135. Hong, Y., Coleman, J., Chan, G., Wong, R., Chiu, C., Hansen, I., et al. (2004). Predicting intergroup bias: The interactive effects of implicit theory and social identity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1035-1047. Hornsey, M. J., Spears, R., Cremers, I., & Hogg, M. A. (2003). Relations between high and low power groups: The importance of legitimacy. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 216 -227. Jackman, M. R. (1994). The velvet glove: Paternalism and conflict in gender, class, and race relations. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Jost, J., & Kay, A. (2005). Exposure to benevolent sexism and complementary gender stereotypes: Consequences for specific and diffuse forms of system justification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 498 -509. Jost, J., Pelham, B., Sheldon, O., & Sullivan, B. (2003). Social inequality and the reduction of ideological dissonance on behalf of the system: Evidence of enhanced system justification among the disadvantaged. European Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 13-36. Jost, J. T., & Banaji, M. R. (1994). The role of stereotyping in systemjustification and the production of false consciousness. British Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 1-27. Jost, J. T., Banaji, M. R., & Nosek, B. A. (2004). A decade of system justification theory: Accumulated evidence of conscious and unconscious bolstering of the status quo. Political Psychology, 25, 881-920. Jost, J. T., & Burgess, D. (2000). Attitudinal ambivalence and the conflict between group and system justification motives in low status groups. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 293-305. Keller, J. (2005). In genes we trust: The biological component of psychological essentialism and its relationship to mechanisms of motivated social cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 686 -702. Kelly, C. (1989). Political identity and perceived intragroup homogeneity. British Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 239 -250. Levy, S., & Dweck, C. (1999). The impact of children's static versus dynamic conceptions of people on stereotype formation. Child Development, 70, 1163-1180.

664 MORTON, POSTMES, HASLAM, AND HORNSEY

Levy, S., Stroessner, S., & Dweck, C. (1998). Stereotype formation and endorsement: The role of implicit theories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1421-1436.
Mahalingam, R. (2003). Essentialism, culture, and power: Representations of social class. Journal of Social Issues, 59, 733-749.
Martin, C., & Parker, S. (1995). Folk theories about sex and race differences. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 45-57.
Morton, T. A., Haslam, S. A., Postmes, T., & Ryan, M. K. (2006). We value what values us: The appeal of identity-affirming science. Political Psychology, 27, 823- 838.
Morton, T. A., Hornsey, M., & Postmes, T. (in press). Shifting ground: The variable use of essentialism in contexts of inclusion and exclusion. British Journal of Social Psychology.
Morton, T. A., Postmes, T., & Jetten, J. (2007). Playing the game: When group success is more important than downgrading deviants. European Journal of Social Psychology, 37, 599 - 616.
Nadler, A. (2002). Inter-group helping relations as power relations: Maintaining or challenging social dominance between groups through helping. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 487-502.
Oakes, P. J., Haslam, S. A., & Turner, J. C. (1994). Stereotyping and social reality. Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell.
Plaks, J., Levy, S., Dweck, C., & Stroessner, S. (2004). In the eye of the beholder: Lay theories and the perception of group entitativity, variability, and essence. In V. Yzerbyt, C. M. Judd, & O. Corneille (Eds.), The psychology of group perception: Perceived variability, entitativity, and essentialism (pp. 127-146). New York: Psychology Press.
Plaks, J., Stroessner, S., Dweck, C., & Sherman, J. (2001). Person theories and attention allocation: Preferences for stereotypic vs. counterstereotypic information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 876 - 893.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rothbart, M., & Taylor, M. (1992). Category labels and social reality: Do we view social categories as natural kinds? In G. Semin & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Language, interaction, and social cognition (pp. 11-36). London: Sage.
Saguy, T., Dovidio, J. F., & Pratto, F. (2008). Beyond contact: Intergroup contact in the context of power relations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 432- 445.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Barquissau, M. (2004). The costs of accepting gender differences: The role of stereotype endorsement in women's experience in the math domain. Sex Roles, 50, 835- 850.
Schmitt, M. T., Branscombe, N. R., & Kappen, D. (2003). Attitudes toward group-based inequality: Social dominance or social identity? British Journal of Social Psychology, 42, 161-186.
Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance: An intergroup theory of social hierarchy and oppression. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Simon, B., & Brown, R. (1987). Perceived intragroup homogeneity in minority-majority contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 703-711.
Spears, R., Doosje, B., & Ellemers, E. (1997). Self-stereotyping in the face of threats to group status and distinctiveness: The role of group identification. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 538 -553.
Stoler, A. L. (1997). On political and psychological essentialisms. Ethos, 25, 101-106.
Summers, L. H. (2005). Remarks at NBER Conference on Diversifying the Science & Engineering Workforce. Retrieved April 24th, 2008, from Harvard University, the Office of the President: http://www .president.harvard.edu/speeches/2005/nber.html
Swim, J. K., Aikin, K. J., Hall, W. S., & Hunter, B. A. (1995). Sexism and racism: Old-fashioned and modern prejudices. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 199 -214.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33- 47). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Tenenbaum, S., & Davidman, L. (2007). It's in my genes: Biological discourse and essentialist views of identity among contemporary American Jews. The Sociological Quarterly, 48, 435- 450.
Verkuyten, M. (2003). Discourses about ethnic group (de-)essentialism: Oppressive and progressive aspects. British Journal of Social Psychology, 42, 371-391.
Verkuyten, M., & Brug, P. (2004). Multiculturalism and group status: The role of ethnic identification, group essentialism and Protestant ethic. European Journal of Social Psychology, 34, 647- 661.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Corneille, O., & Estrada, C. (2001). The interplay of subjective essentialism and entitativity in the formation of stereotypes. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5, 141-155.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Estrada, C., Corneille, O., Seron, E., & Demoulin, S. (2004). Subjective essentialism in action: Self-anchoring and social control as consequences of fundamental social divides. In V. Y. Yzerbyt, C. M., Judd, & O. Corneille (Eds.), The psychology of group perception: Perceived variability, entitativity, and essentialism. London: Psychology Press.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Rocher, S., & Schadron, G. (1997). Stereotypes as explanations: A subjective essentialistic view of group perception. In: R. Spears, P. J. Oakes, N. Ellemers, & S. A. Haslam (Eds.), The social psychology of stereotyping and group life (pp. 20 -50). Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Rogier, A., & Fiske, S. (1998). Group entitativity and social attribution: On translating situational constraints into stereotypes. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 1090 -1104.
Received September 25, 2007 Revision received May 12, 2008
Accepted May 20, 2008 

