NEWS FOCUS

THE FUTURE OF NIH

and centers don't appear flustered. "We saw

THE NUMBERS

this coming and prepared for it from the be-

ginning." says Anthony Fauci, head of the

NIH Prays for a Soft Landing

$2 billion National Institute of Allergy and infectious Diseases (NIAID), the third-

After Its Doubling Ride Ends

largest member of the NIH fleet. Some of the cost-containment strategies used by Fauci and other institute directors---from re-

Why won't a $2.8 billion increase buy any more individual grants next

straining the number of new grants to em-

year? The answer is keeping researchers and NIH officials up at night

phasizing one-shot spending on infrastruc-

ture--are certain to be featured moves in

For years the U.S, biomedical community as NIH's budget growth slows.

NIH's postdoubling dance.

has charted the well-being of its most im-

"It's a very strange time." says Dave Moore

But that doesn't mean they will be popu-

portant benefactor, the National Institutes of of the Association of Ameriean Medical Col- lar with rank-and-file scientists. Some NIH

Health (Nlli). with a single number--how- leges in Washington. D.C. "We're in the midst officials are bracing for the laborious task of

many new and competing researeh grants of unparalleled success, but we're already wor- explaining why. in the midst of apparent

the agency awards each year. The number is rying about what happens when it ends." Even plenty, the agency is showing restraint in

a proxy for the system's support of individu- if Congress provides larger than minimal in- grantmaking. Exhibit No. 1 is holding the

al investigators, and a steady rise was long creases, "the time is coming when we must number of new grants steady at about ')I5(1

seen as the best way to ensure the future of decide which [projects] will not move for- in 2002 despite a proposed 14% budget in-

academic biomedicine.

ward." says cancer researcher Phil Sharp of the crease, "We need to ihink about how we

No longer. Next year, despite an expected Massachusetts Institute of Technology in align the expectations of the grantees with

$2.8 billion increase designed to keep NIH Cambridge. Massachusetts, who leads a Na- what we think we can do." says Richard

on track to double its budget to $27 billion in tional Cancer Institute INCI) advisory panel. K-lausner. head of the NCI,

2003. the number of competing awards is

projected to remain exactly

the same as this year (see

graph). Ironically, the stagnation in new grants is occur-

40,000 -

ring largely because NIH has

35.000 -

already committed much of its new money to paying tor more than 25.000 existing grants. Tlie growing size of these grants is also adding to the strain (see graph), as is a

30,000B 1 25,000 -
Ol
 20,000 -
*e
% 15,000 -

rise in spending on "big biology." ranging from expensive

10,000 -

equipment and new build-

5,000 -

Adds Moore: "The math is inescapable.'"
Total grants New grants Budget

-40
-35
-30 a
-25 ? 2
m
-20 a -15 tt
-10
-5

Fonner NIH direetor Harold Varmus contributed to those expectations hy predieting a few years ago-- optimistically, in retrospect--that the number of new grants would reach 12.800 in 2003. fnUeed, lowering the expectations of researchers "may be the challenge facing a new director," another senior NIH official predicts. One soothing thought; Under virtually any likely scenario, the postdoubling Nil! will still be makiny more and larger grants than at any other time in its history.

ings to clinical trials and research collaborations that involve dozens of institutions and hundreds of scientists. Indeed, virtually every NIH interest group has shared in the doubling bonanza--from patient groups advocating

ri -- 0
1993 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 '00 '01 Year
Throttling back. NIH has increased grant size (below, right) and total awards but is holding steady the number of new grants despite budget growth (above).

.n
'02*

Spending spree
Boom-and-bust cycles aren't new for NIH. In the 1980s and early 1990s, tlic agency had to reduce grants and trim

more research on "their" disease to scientists urging greater spending on the agency's intramural program.

Officially, acting NIH director Ruth Kirschstein says the agency is ready for slower growth. Last

But the good times won't last forever. month she appointed a special

That reality has fueled speculation that the committee that she promises will

postdoubling years may include cuts in ev- work "very hard over the summer"

erything from the size and number of grants on a plan to case the pain of with-

to clinical research to statc-of-thc-art lab drawal from NIH's doubling habit.

equipment and databases. One ominous sign Privately, however, NUI insiders

is preliminary Bush Administration budget say that the planners face limited

plans tliat call for NIH to get annual budget options, in large part because of

increases of only 2% after 2003--a far cry from its recent 13% to 15% annual boosts. Another is the slumping economy, which is expected to trim surpluses by reducing government revenues. Then there's the massive tax cut recently approved by Congress. which will start to take its biggest bites just

spending commitments and policy decisions made years ago. Nearly 50% of the agency's S2.4 billion budget increase this year, for instance, is already committed to previously awarded grants--which run nearly 4 years on average (see sidebar on p. 1993).
Still, the directors of NIH's 27 institutes

spending in response to slow-growing budgets, putting researchers on a financial roller coaster. But the current doubling sprint--the agency's budget historically has taken 7 to 9 years to double--has poured st much money I into the system so quickly that it may have a permanently altered the perceptions of re- S

1992

15 JUNE 2001 VOL 292 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

NEWS FOCUS

NIH Stays the Course in Choosing How
*V ,

ttiivvee pprroommiisseess ttoo ffuunnddeefffofortrs to wam physicians about the dangers as-
soocciiaatteedd ww iit hh ann iinncreassiirngly popular "club drug" called gamma hy-

To Spend Its Growing Budget

ddroxybutyrate ((GGHBB) and to help toxicologists and pharmacologists

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is in a groove--or a rut Two ssttuuddyy CCHHBB's's bbiioollooggiiccaallancd behavioral effects. Others push to acceler-

recently released reports" examine how it has spent its huge annual ate the development of vvaccines against Alzheimer's disease and AIDS,

budget increases, and what it would do with the rest of a projected orr employ gene chipss----^vwAl-\kh can tell researchers which genes are ac-

$14 billion infusion over 5 years. The short answer Its decisions large- tive in certain cells--to stuudy the role of genes in everything from alco-

ly mirror existing budget priorities. But a bigger budget has caused holism to arthritis. Other projects focus on translating basic research

some management problems.

into practical treatments. One set of clin-

In particular, more than half of recent increases have gone to increasing

NIH FY 2001 Buds! Increase ($2442 Millton)

ical trials, for example, will test--often for the first time--the efficacy of differ-

the number and size of extramural

ent approaches to treating drug addic-

grants (see pie chart). That is just fine

tion, from counseling to medications. An-

with many researchers, who believe

Beseaicti Ttolnina S52 (2%)

other is developing a database that will

that allowing deserving academic scientists to follow their instincts is an

'* BesearcH and Developmenl

help cancer investigators more quickly identify vi/hen candidate dnjgs are ready

idea that never goes out of style. "1

for clinical trials. One other pnsmises to

would be disappointed to see [NIH] re-

Inlramural Research Z524 jg%)

develop an artificial salivary gland--a

treat from individual investigators ... or

tube filled with saliva-producing cells--

not sustain their purchasing power,"

Other Research Grants i t M 17%)

that could be implanted In patients with

says cancer researcher Phil Sharp of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, who leads a National

\ Oiftae of the Oireclor I K , 5 ((%)
Research Managemenl and Support S92 14%)

swallowing problems.
Although biomedieal research advocates say these and other projects are

Cancer Institute advisory panel.

'

good investments, some worry that the

The big budget boosts have also al- Big eaters. Grant seekers get the llaarrggeessttsslliicceeooffNNIIHH's's22000011 grovrth may be taking a toll on NIH pro-

lowed growth in NIH's other funding budget increase--and of the age;nncy's overall budget.

gram managers. Institute directors re-

mechanisms, from R&D contracts to its

port that frontline project managers are

intramural program. Although the reports don't detail exactly where juggling more grants----ssooimetimes hundreds at a time--and burning

the dollars flow, they do provide a laundry list of nearly 150 new and ouutt more quickly. At tthhe National Cancer Institute, for instance, the

planned initiatives. Not surprisingly, many of the featured projects tar- average grant manager nn(ow has less than 3 years of experience and

get diseases or issues that are both medically important and politically ttuummoovveerr iissaapppprrooaacchhiinngg220(% per year.

popular. In a bow toward drug control, for instance, one current initia-

BBuutt help may be ccoomn-ing. NIH wants money for more staff to

* "NIH FY 2001 Investments" and "NIH Investments, Progress, and Plans: FY 1999-2003." (Both are available at www,nih,gov/news/BudgetFY2002/ index.htm)

m^^a"^n&a^ge tthhee ggrraannttss,, aannddCongress, which in recent years has held

ddoowwnn ggrroowwtthh iinn tthhiiss aarreeaa, seems supportive of increases that would

keep pace with NIH's expai nding research portfolio.

-D.M.

searchers. It^ certainly been a balm for such recurring sensitive issues as improving intramural nisearch or tinkering with peer review. In 2()02. for instance. NUI officials expect to fund a record 36,143 grants--up 34% from 1997, the year before doubling began, and up 51% since 1993. The average grantee also will be getting more money than ever, about S367.OOO a year--a S25,uOO jump over this year and 36% higher than in 1998,
At the same time, the agency has launched a vast array of initiatives and extended its reach into fields where it once had a limited presence. Several institutes have stepped up their support for clinical research in response to concerns that NIH wasn't doing enough to move basic research findings into medical practice. The agency now pours nearly S6 billion a year into clinical studies, including those at 80 major centers, which sponsor 90U0 investigators and involve tens of thousands of piitients. There are also new loan repayment programs to pay olf the education debts of scientists who I agree to get involved in clinical research, g The arrival of big biology has meant i spending hundreds of millions of dollars to

buy specialized machines, build massive shared databases, and assemble research consortia--such as the one that is unraveling the human genome--that involve dozens of players. "The classic image of the lone scientist making great discoveries in a small laboratory is a faded image ofthe past," Judith Vaitukaitis, director of NIH's National Center for Research Resources, recently explained to a House spending panel looking at NIH's grov^ing support for infi^structure. By 2003, for instance, NIH will have spent tens of millions of dollars to double the number of synchrotron beamlines available to biologists studying the structure of everything from proteins to tissues. Another $20 million will have gone to developing a nationwide network of mouse-breeding facilities that provide specialized mutant mice to scientists.
Sustaining this cornucopia of grants, clinical trials, and infrastructure won't be easy. Informally, NIH officials say that preliminary studies project that some institutes would need annual budget increases of 7% to 12% after 2003 to sustain existing programs and keep pace with expected inflation. But with key lawmakers already signaling that they are

"going to take care of NIH, then move on to other priorities, I don't know how [we] could pull off those kinds of increases," says Moore. "The scientific rationale may be there ,,. but the politics are very diftlcult."
Eyes on the future Given such predictions, many institute directors--including those of the big three--have already trimmed their sails. At NIAID, for instance, Fauci notes that he and his advisers long ago made the "sotnewliat itnpopular decision" to hold down the number of new grants to indiv idual investigators, choosing instead to focus on increasing the size of grants and building infrastructure that often has low canying costs. As a result, he says, NIAID's new grant numbers will decline slightly next yeiv, to 985, from 1004 this yeai;
At the second-ranked National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, director Claude Lenfant outlined similar choices in an April letter to grantees, explaining why the number of new grants awarded by his institute in 2002 will decline by nearly 10%, to 911, compared to last year. "The generous increase in our budget does not translate into

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 292 15 JUNE 2001

1993

NEWS FOCUS

an ever-increasing number of suceessful competing grant applieations." Lenfant vy^rote. At the same time, he noted that the average grant has gotten bigger.
At the $3.74 billion NCI--the largest member of the NIH f;imily--Klausner notes that the cost of grants has risen faster than the institute's budget in reeent years, steadily eating into the pool of money available for new projects. The amount of inoney for new initiatives is shrinking fast, from S262 million in 20()0 to $176 million this year, with a continued drop tbrecast for 2002, "Next year will be the most difficult by far," predicts Klausner.
In response, NCT is capping the increases that can be requested by investigators seeking renewal of their 3- and 4-year awards and ordering a special review tor grants larger than $500,000 a year, a category that's growing rapidly. By 2003. however, KJausner predicts that enough existing grants will have expired to ease the transition to slower growth rates.
Although the report of the special postdoubling committee isn't due until fall, the agency's 2002 budget request offers some clues about the strategies it might recommend for spending future budget inereases wisely. One is to continue investing heavily in infrastructure. For instance. NIH officials are touting plans to spend tens of millions of dollars over the next few years on high-end equipment--specialized electron microscopes, supercomputers, and other machines costing $500.000 or more. There is also talk of making a dent in an estimated $6 billion backlog in needed construction and renovation projects at universities and research hospitals. Both types of spending are attractive because, unlike grants, they can be paid for in a single budget year.
Last year, similar ideas led Representative David Obey (R-WI), the senior Democrat on tlie House panel that oversees NIH's budget, to ask whether such spending "really was the way the science is going, or a way to move larger sums of money now that you are getting these increases?" This year, however, there were virtually no such challenges at a House hearing on NIH's infrastructure proposals. And in the Senate, Tom Harkin (D-IA). the new head of the spending panel tkxX tiversees NIH's budget, encouraged officials to think about giving more cash to grantees who need bigger labs and better equipment.
Researchers are seconding that idea. Last week, for instance, an advisory group led by William Brody, president of Johns Hopkins University in Bahimore, Marylimd, recommended that NIH boost eonstruction and renovation grants to $ I billion a year--^from $75 million this year. But Kirsehstein deferred the idea until December
Another issue likely to be aired in committee discussions is the impact of "modular" grants. Under the streamlining policy, a

legacy of former director Harold Varmus and implemented in earnest last year, all grants of $250.000 or less have been awarded in increments of $25,000. The idea was to reduce the amount of paperwork for smaller grants. But it has had the unintended side effect of boosting overall spending: Lured by the laek of paperwork, more investigators appear to be requesting nmding levels closer to the ceiling, and renewal grant amounts are routinely rounded up.
bi his letter, for instanee, Lenfant noted that his institute limits renewal grants to a 10% increase, so a $100,000 grantee ean ask for up to $110.000 the second time around. Under the modular grant appRiach, however, the grant is rounded up to $125,000. The development is "one noteworthy cause" of rising grant costs, Lenfant wrote.
Klausner would also like to see peer re-

viewers take a closer look at the costs of proposed research. The thousands of seientists who review proposals to NIH are currently instructed to focus on scientific merit, and Klausner says that most study sections routinely recommend funding levels very near the investigators request. But those budgets are "often iar in excess of what we can realistically provide." says Klausner. The process of negotiating lower amounts has "become an enormous stress on program staff," he says.

Resolving these issues to everyone's satis-

faction, however, still won't solve NIH's bud-

get crunch. Observers say that only a miracle

will prevent stagnation and slumps after 2003

ill the number of grants, infrastructure spend-

ing, and clinical research. Doubling has "giv-

en everyone a little something to celebrate,"

notes one NIH oifieial. But the bill is rapidly

coming due.

-DAVID MALAKOFF

THE FUTURE OF NtH THE WINNERS
Even in a Time of Plenty, Some Do Better Than Others
"Fat cat" basic researchers, directors of large trials and surveys, and genomics Pooh-Bahs top the list of scientists vi/tth the most NIH funding

With a 25-person lab and eight grants irom er grants {see p. 1992). In this time of plenty,

the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH grant administrators early this year ex-

virologist Joseph Sodroski of the Dana- amined what they eall the "fat cats"--prinei-

Farijer Cancer histitute in Boston has a lot pal investigators (Pis) with six or more

going on, "There are people from all over grants--to make sure that NIH's 27 institutes

the world here," he says, "and keeping ev- and centers are not funding duplicative work

erybody fulfilled and happy is a ehal- and Pis aren't overextended. Extramural re-

lenge." And his research keeps sprouting in search chief Wendy Baldwin eoneluded that

new directions, from how HIV envelope "there was nothing to be concerned about"

glycoproteins help the virus enter cells, to tbr the 30 or so people on her list.

their cytopathology, to their possible role in

Science decided to take its own look at the

vaccines. Federal funding is the food that people at the top of the funding heap, examin-

nourishes those ideas, so

ing the total amount of

even though his plate is

money received and

full already, Sodroski

number of grants. Recip-

says, "if an idea comes

ients were divided into

along that looks fund-

three groups--those

able, I'll probably write a

who do mostly basic re-

grant [proposal],"

search, clinical and so-

That drive netted So-

cial science researchers,

droski $4 million in NIH

and genomics centers.

funding last year, putting

The leaders receive

liim in the upper echelons

$3 million or more a

of the agency's basic re-

year, eight times what

search grantees and at the

the average investigator

very top in terms of num-

receives. At tbe same

ber of grants. A leading AIDS researcher and

time, the portfolios of most of the top investi-

skilled proposal writer, So-

gators include grants

droski has benefited fi^om

shared with other labs.

an exploding NIH budget Purring. AIDS researcher Joseph So- Identifying the topihat has allowed the agen- droski made NIH's "fat cats" list of in- ftmded researchers from cy to award more and larg- vestigators with six or more grants. an NIH list of grants

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 292 15 JUNE 2001

1995

Copyright of Science is the property of American Association for the Advancement of Science and its content may not be copied without the publisher's express written permission except for the print or download capabilities of the retrieval software used for access. This content is intended solely for the use of the individual user. Copyright of Science is the property of American Association for the Advancement of Science and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

