Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State: The Challenges of Accommodating Neurological Difference

MICHAEL ORSINI University of Ottawa

We have your son. We will make sure he will not be able to care for himself or interact socially as long as he lives. This is only the beginning.
Autism

Introduction
The text of this epigraph accompanied a publicity campaign launched in 2007 by the New York University Child Study Center to sensitize the public to autism. Dubbed the Ransom Notes campaign, the print and TV ads became a rallying cry for many in the autism community. Activists were incensed by the ominous voice-over that accompanied the ads, which sought to communicate the idea of autism as an abductor of innocent children, and of an unstoppable epidemic ~Autistic Self-Advocacy Network @ASAN#, 2007!. ASAN leader Ari Ne'eman, who spearheaded opposition to the campaign, called it "highly offensive" for relying "on some of the oldest and most offensive disability stereotypes to frighten parents

This article is based on research funded by a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council ~SSHRC! Standard Research Grant, #410-2007-0256, and approved by the Research Ethics Board of the University of Ottawa. The author thanks the journal's three anonymous reviewers, Michael Prince and Miriam Smith for helpful comments. My colleagues Luc Turgeon and Martin Papillon ably assisted with the translation of the abstract. Jim Sinclair of Autism Network International facilitated my participation in the Autreat meeting at which many interviews were conducted with autistic participants. Audrey L'Esperance, Sarah Wiebe and Melissa Moor provided superb research assistance. Michael Orsini, School of Political Studies, University of Ottawa, 120 University Private ~11002!, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, email: morsini@uottawa.ca

Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue canadienne de science politique

45:4 (December/decembre 2012) 805-827

doi:10.10170S000842391200100X

(c) 2012 Canadian Political Science Association ~l'Association canadienne de science politique! and0et la Societe quebecoise de science politique

806 MICHAEL ORSINI
into making use of the NYU Child Study Center's services" ~Autistic Self-Advocacy Network, 2007!. While the centre eventually bowed to pressure and suspended the campaign, this controversy revealed some of the deep divisions among those who advocate for autism on the political stage.
This article draws upon some of these polarizing perspectives to ask how attention to accommodating this widely prevalent disability might reframe debates about the welfare state's support for different forms of diversity. Autism is a useful case study because it highlights how neurological difference cannot be "managed" in the same way as we treat other forms of diversity. Autism also forces us to confront the complex ways in which disability ~and disabled people! have been marginalized from policy processes generally and from public policy discussions related to diversity and disability specifically. When autism is discussed publicly, it is presented as a catastrophe, a horror that is visited upon poor, unsuspecting families. For instance, a Senate committee heard from a witness who claimed that autism was "worse than cancer because the person with autism has a normal lifespan. The problem is with you for a lifetime. The problem is with you seven days a week, 24 hours a day, for the rest of your life" ~Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology, 2003: 12!. When autistic people attempt to articulate their own concerns and engage in debates about the direction of autism policy, they are categorically "written off " ~Dawson, 2004b!.
Some advocates for autism-related policy support "treatment" for autistic children, to help them overcome some of the more disabling characteristics of autism, including self-stimulating behaviour ~"stimming"! and difficulties with social interaction. In contrast, those who opposed the ad campaign and its portrayal of autistic individuals as inherently deficient and of autism as the "thief of childhood," contend that damaging stereotypes need to be replaced with policies and programs that valorize autistic difference, not correct for it. Both groups agree that we need to expand the circle of care and support for autistic people1 and their families, including children and adults who are on the autism spectrum. But they differ fundamentally on the nature of autism. Advocates who want to treat autism are more aligned with a medical model of disability, which views disabled people as defective, abnormal, or deviant. The second group is rooted in a social model, which views disability as socially produced, not simply an individual deficit that needs to be overcome ~see Shakespeare, 2006b!.2
I argue that the case of autism illustrates two fundamental challenges to how we view the welfare state's accommodation of disability. On the one hand, the advocacy surrounding a high-profile Supreme Court of Canada case ~Auton v. British Columbia! framed autism in terms of expanding coverage for "medically necessary" treatment as part of universal health care. On the other hand, the claims made by and on behalf

Abstract. In the last decade, autism has become one of the most hotly contested health policy issues in North America and beyond. From debates about the role of vaccines to the efficacy of therapeutic interventions, a range of civil society actors has been advocating for policy and societal change in the field, with mixed success. In Canada, this culminated in 2004 with a much-publicized Supreme Court decision--Auton v. British Columbia--that pitted parents of autistic children against the BC government, which was unwilling to cover the costs of behavioural treatment for autistic children. In contrast to parent-led advocacy groups, there has been a flurry of civil society activity waged by autistic self-advocates who decry the focus on curing autistic people and press instead for the recognition of neurological difference. Drawing on interviews with advocates in Canada and the US, this article highlights these contending perspectives and argues that both pose fundamental challenges to how we view the redistributive aims of the welfare state in Canada and beyond.
Resume. Au cours de la derniere decennie, l'autisme est devenu l'un des enjeux les plus controverses dans le domaine de la sante au Canada et a l'etranger. Que ce soit lors de debats sur le role des vaccins ou encore sur l'efficacite des interventions therapeutiques, plusieurs acteurs de la societe civile ont milite, avec un succes mitige, en faveur de changements dans politiques et sociaux par rapport a l'autisme. Au Canada, cet activisme resultera en une decision fort controversee de la Cour Supreme en 2004, Auton v. Colombie-Brittanique, portant sur un conflit entre les parents d'enfants autistes et le gouvernement de la Colombie-Britannique, qui refusait de payer le cout des traitements pour les enfants autistes. En parallele au militantisme des parents d'enfants autistes, des individus autistes se sont aussi mobilises pour denoncer cette fois l'objectif meme de guerir les personnes autistes. Ces derniers exigent plutot que soient reconnues leurs differences et, de maniere plus large, le principe de la diversite neurologique. Se basant sur des entrevues avec des militants et des militantes, cet article presente ces differentes perspectives et demontre qu'elles remettent en question la facon dont nous conceptualisons le modele de redistribution associe a l'Etat-providence.
of autistic self-advocates ask us to rethink whether autism is a disability at all, at least for some. Many self-advocates have embraced the notion of "neurodiversity" to frame their claims that the state and society need to accommodate cognitive difference rather than try to cure or treat people who are autistic. Neurodiversity is the term used to denote support for forms of diversity that are rooted in "differently wired" brains ~Ortega, 2009!. The etiology of the term has been traced to Australian sociologist Judy Singer and journalist Harvey Blume, who both introduced and popularized the term in the late 1990s ~Armstrong, 2010!. While neurodiversity has come to be associated with autism ~Jaarsma and Welin, 2011!, individuals living with other brain-related differences also belong to the neurodiversity community. They include individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ~ADHD!, bipolar disorder, dyslexia and Alzheimer's Disease. Such a diverse grouping, however, makes it difficult to generalize about what constitutes typically "neurodiverse" behaviour, especially given that these experiences are marked by varying degrees of stigma. When it is expressed in autistic communities, neurodiversity retains strong identitarian features. As Ortega explains, "the cerebralization of autism" means that "people define themselves as autistics ~rather than as having autism! because their brains are `wired' in an atypical way" ~2009: 427!.

808 MICHAEL ORSINI
These two perspectives--autism as a debilitating disability and autism as neurological difference--may not be mutually exclusive, however. It is possible to support funding for autism care and support, recognizing that some opponents view the behavioural interventions championed by autism advocates as an assault on autistic personhood, all the while imagining a renewed role for the welfare state in promoting the needs of its neurodiverse citizens. I suggest that the notion of "interdependence" might assist us in navigating these two seemingly polarized perspectives: autism treatment, on the one hand, and support for cognitive difference and neurodiversity, on the other. The idea of interdependence helps us to appreciate how cognitively different citizens need to be supported in ways that recognize our attachments to others without requiring us to position disabled citizens as "less than" or inferior to others for whom disability might stand outside the bounds of "normal" human experience ~Arneil, 2009!.
The first section of the article discusses briefly some of the literature on diversity and the welfare state, paying specific attention to how it largely neglects disability as a distinctive form of difference. What are the implications of freezing out disability for the study of diversity? Is the diversity tent large enough to accommodate the needs and concerns of disabled people, generally, and cognitively different people, specifically? Unlike the debates that have characterized the study of multiculturalism policies in welfare states, I am not attempting to assess whether there is a trade-off between redistribution, on the one hand, and support for diversity, on the other ~Banting, 2010; Banting and Kymlicka, 2006!. Indeed, it is worth considering the extent to which the language of redistribution, as applied to the disabled, privileges the able-bodied, normal citizen who is exhorted to "give back" to those who are less fortunate or deserving of charity ~Arneil, 2009!. Rather, I am interested in how attention to cognitive difference challenges how we think about diversity in the first place, not to mention the agency of autistic citizens as legitimate political actors. Autistic people, when they are the focus of public policy, are rarely framed as citizens who possess rights, hopes or aspirations, much less ideas about politics. They are characteristically dependent upon the good will or benevolence of others, whether they are sympathetic policy makers who have been "touched" by autism or the loving parents and caring friends who perform much of the "emotional labour" that autism requires ~Silverman, 2012!.
In the second and third sections, I present the autism case study, drawing on 23 interviews with autism advocates and activists in the US and Canada, among other sources.3 These sections elaborate the two main challenges autism poses to how we think about the accommodation of cognitive disability and the welfare state. I use the term cognitive disability here, rather than intellectual disability, as the former is more inclu-

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

809

sive and captures the fact that the disabilities often grouped under this umbrella do not always imply significant intellectual deficits ~Kittay and Carlson, 2010: 1-25!.4 I attempt to bring disability perspectives into a productive tension with some of the literature that deals with how to promote diversity in authentic and affirming ways. A key component of such a reframing involves a recognition that disabled people are citizens first. Therefore, any approach that tries to accommodate neurological diversity and autistic "ways of knowing" must pay careful attention to how one might reconfigure our current "citizenship regime" to engage the cognitively disabled citizens among us, a theme that is explored in the final section of the article.

Diversity, Disability and the Welfare State
Few would dispute that Canada has become synonymous with a support for diversity, whether grounded in ethnicity, race, language, gender or sexual orientation, among other possible groupings. Recent important criticisms notwithstanding ~Dhamoon, 2009!, when Canada is measured against a number of industrialized countries, we normally fare well in terms of policies that support the recognition of difference. The record is decidedly mixed, however, when one expands the definition of difference beyond the usual categories. As Smith discussed in her CPSA presidential address, discussions of diversity tend to focus on issues of culture, identity and recognition, leaving untouched issues related to groups or constituencies who are often viewed as outside of the mainstream. Smith suggests the creation of human rights policy as a distinctive ~and legitimate! policy field, which would allow scholars to look cross-nationally at policies, as well as pay closer attention to the "legal, material and institutional dimensions of the policy field" ~Smith, 2009!. While there are advantages to "turning down the heat," as it were, on some of the more normatively tinged debates related to diversity, such as those related to "reasonable accommodation," Smith's approach is only partially helpful here as it privileges a particular theoretical approach ~historical institutionalism! to capture shifts in the burgeoning policy field she identifies. One can still, however, heed Smith's call to treat diversity "as a form of political power" without drawing explicitly on the tools of institutional analysis to do so.
The political science and sociology literature examining diversity as a "challenge" for the welfare state is notable for the relative lack of attention paid to non-traditional forms of diversity not rooted in racial, ethnic, cultural or linguistic difference ~Abu-Laban and Gabriel, 2002; Banting, 2010; Banting et al., 2006; Eisenberg, 2006; Harell and Stolle, 2010!. While there are legitimate historical reasons for exploring how and why certain forms of diversity are privileged over others, especially

810 MICHAEL ORSINI
in the context of the founding nations debate in Canada, for instance, there is nonetheless a curious absence in the literature vis-a-vis other forms of diversity, such as those associated with disability, which might also lend themselves to explanations that are grounded in culture, politics or the economy. Instead, with some exceptions, scholars interested in diversity seem to operate within a disciplinary logic in which certain forms of diversity are allowed in while other forms are viewed as inadmissible. While some might bristle at such suggestions, insisting rather that Canada is characterized by an appreciation for the "diversity of diversities" ~Jenson and Papillon, 2000!, such pronouncements can gloss over the multiple ways in which power organizes certain forms of diversity outside of the "universe of political discourse" ~Jenson, 1989!.
The idea that disability itself is a form of diversity that need not always be overcome is a difficult one to grasp, especially through the lens of liberalism. As Dhamoon notes, seeing culture as represented in ethnic, religious, national or linguistic terms "privileges one family of differences over other kinds of difference" and views culture "as the site of trouble that must be remedied and as an identity that should be subject to limited forms of regulated accommodation" ~Dhamoon, 2009: 21!. Moreover, Pothier and Devlin add, unlike the cases of racial, gender, or sexual orientation, liberalism does seek "to abolish disability on the basis that human beings are not meant to `suffer' disability" ~2006: 11!.
This curious absence might also be explained by suggestions made by some political philosophers that the model citizen who dominates liberal constructions of social justice and diversity is almost always ablebodied ~Kittay and Carlson, 2010; Wikler, 2010!. Contemporary political philosophy "tends to view social justice primarily as a set of principles established by and for human adults who enjoy average or better cognitive function. Each sub-population that fails to qualify for membership in this elite group... thus constitutes a problem case for any general theory that must be worked out in a matter consistent with the particular theory's guiding principles" ~Wikler, 2010: 183!. In her important critique, Arneil suggests that those interested in promoting a robust theory of difference politics should adopt the principle of interdependence. Interdependence, she explains,
begins by breaking down the binary at the base of liberal0republican theory between an autonomous rational agent who is to be part of human dignity, the social contract or original position ~governed by the principle of justice! and his or her opposite, the "disabled" ~who are to be excluded or governed under the principle of "charity"! and replaces it with a gradient scale in which we are all in various ways and to different degrees both dependent on others and independent, depending on the particular stage we are at in the life cycle as well as the degree to which the world is structured to respond to some variations better than others. ~Arneil, 2009: 234-35!

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

811

A focus on interdependence, she adds, helps us to uncouple disability from the predominant deficit model by reconstructing disability as an "interdependent product of disabled individuals' physical0mental limitations in relationship to the physical, social, and political environment they must navigate on a daily basis" ~234!. In response to some of the weaknesses inherent in approaches that are grounded in an "ethic of care," Arneil suggests that an explicit recognition of interdependency problematizes "the asymmetrical relationship between caregivers and care-receivers, by reconceptualizing the disabled care-receiver as a citizen rather than "child" or client and the relationship, therefore, as interdependent rather than wholly dependent" ~234!. "Ethic of care" approaches usefully begin from the premise that "care work" needs to be valorized in ways that demonstrate a deep commitment to "understanding experiences of discrimination, suffering, and oppression" ~Hankivsky, 2004: 2; see also Kershaw, 2005, 2008!. Generally, however, an approach grounded in an ethic of care leaves little room to consider the agency of those being cared for in the first place. The presumption that care is devalued or undervalued, not to mention highly gendered and racialized, is emphasized at the expense of how care work itself might contribute to the passivity of care recipients.
In his recent work on disability politics in Canada, Prince argues that their status as quasi-citizens--"absent citizens" in his words--has left the disabled frozen out of policy discussions that affect them in profound ways. Until recently, the disabled were viewed as a burden on society, to be pitied "as defective, sick, tragic figures lurking in the margins of communities" ~Prince, 2009: 198!. It took several decades before they would be "released from the yoke of paternalism and charity" ~Valentine and Vickers, 1996!. Despite the strides of the disability movement in Canada and elsewhere, some disability advocates worry that fighting to preserve the expansion of the rights of disabled people who are excluded from the dominant institutions of society will become increasingly difficult in a world marked by a belief that "imperfection is preventable or at least remediable" ~Linton, 2007: 240!. This might help to explain why opposition to interventions grounded in applied behavioural analysis are met with puzzlement by some non-autistics who have difficulty understanding why autistic people would resist any efforts that might make them less autistic, or at least, help them to "pass" as non-autistic ~Davidson and Henderson, 2010!.
When it comes to how the welfare state affects the life chances of disabled citizens, governments also have been slow to acknowledge the state's role in ordering social relations. There is a tendency "to see patterns of advantages and disadvantages defined by class status and power `out there' in civil society and the market economy" ~Prince, 2009: 71!. Groups do not simply emerge out of nowhere as priorities for policy makers; government policies and programs communicate particular values and goals, which act as a form of "disciplinary power" on those

812 MICHAEL ORSINI
marginalized members of society ~Prince, 2009: 78!. While Prince is careful to avoid the pitfalls of a pan-Canadian approach to disability politics, he notes that there are critical opportunities to think about how the experience of disability can be folded into policy processes and decision making in ways that simultaneously improve the lives of people with disabilities and render disabled lives and stories "narratable" ~ Frank, 2002!. Narratability "means that events and lives are affirmed as being worth telling and thus worth living. Being narratable implies value and attributes reality" ~ Frank, 2002: 111!.
While disabled people may be marginal actors in the policy process, disability is far from a marginal concern. However defined, disability is a fundamental feature of the welfare state. Direct federal disability spending alone accounted for more than $5.2 billion in 2010 ~Government of Canada, 2010!. At least 4.4 million Canadians live with a disability, a figured that has been increasing over the last few decades ~Statistics Canada, 2007!. Empirically, Prince explains, there are a number of reasons why disability is increasing in importance, including the realities of an aging population, scientific advances that are prolonging people's lives and the social acceptability of disability ~Prince, 2009: 201!.5 In the case of autism, it is important to underline how the widening criteria for an autism diagnosis brought cognitive disability into the forefront of public attention. In a bold argument, Eyal and colleagues ~2010, 3! suggest that the "current rise in autism diagnoses... should be understood as an aftershock of the real earthquake, which was the deinstitutionalization of mental retardation that took place in the late 1960s." This deinstitutionalization acted, the authors explain, as a "moral blender into which disappeared the old categories" that were used to denote children and others who deviated from normal or typical behaviour ~Eyal et al., 2010: 3!. It is why the "autism spectrum" encompasses individuals with limited communicative capacity to those with Asperger's syndrome and higher-than-average intellectual abilities. The recognition that the autism spectrum runs the spectrum indeed has led the authors of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ~DSM ! to consider whether Asperger's should be dropped from the definition of autism ~Ghaziuddin, 2010; Grinker, 2010!.6 To summarize then, disability, whether rooted in bodily impairment or cognitive difference, is fast becoming a defining feature of Canadian society and politics. In the next section, I discuss the emergence of autism as one of the most widely discussed--and hotly contested--disabilities of the last decade.
Understanding Autism and Autism Politics
Autism spectrum disorders affect roughly 1 in 88 children ~Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012!. The Autism Society of Canada

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

813

estimates that about 200,000 Canadians have an autism spectrum disorder ~ASD!. The language of a looming epidemic dominates the public policy landscape, with some activists claiming, on the one hand, that little is being done to stem the tide of diagnoses, with others objecting to epidemic language in the first place, as if autism were somehow contagious. The language of epidemic is all the more pressing because interventions in the name of autism are attached to childhood, which figures prominently in a retooled welfare state that is focused on "social investment" ~Esping-Andersen et al., 2002; Jenson and Saint-Martin, 2003; Kershaw, 2005!. Failing to intervene early, treatment proponents argue, means missing a critical window of opportunity for newly diagnosed children. Critics, on the other hand, suggest that it is precisely the timing of the intervention, when children can neither fully understand nor consent to treatment, that is ethically problematic.
Although there are criteria for establishing a diagnosis of autism, there is great variety along the autism spectrum. ASD is defined by a set of behaviours that range from the very mild to the severe. Individuals with autism typically experience deficits in three areas: 1! social interaction, 2! verbal and nonverbal communication, and 3! repetitive behaviours or interests. Noted autism researcher Simon Baron-Cohen has famously argued that autistic individuals are "mindblind": they are unable to read the intentions of others and have difficulty in everyday social interaction ~Baron-Cohen, 1997!.
While there is vociferous debate in the autism advocacy and research communities about what actually constitutes autism, including some opposition to Baron-Cohen's characterization of mindblindness, debates about the origin and treatment of autism are even more heated and polarizing. Debates persist about the link between autism and vaccines that contain mercury, debates that were fuelled, in part, by a series of high-profile US legal victories for children "injured" by vaccines. The activist parents who have been in the forefront of these claims have dubbed themselves "mercury mothers," the most famous being Hollywood celebrity Jenny McCarthy, a best-selling author and spokesperson for the "vaccines-cause-autism" theory. In Canada, while some alarm has been raised about the safety of vaccines, greater attention has focused on whether the state should fund applied behavioral analysis ~ABA!, which some advocates claim is the only evidence-based treatment available. Explaining the vehement opposition expressed by some to this treatment, one Canadian activist added, "Often people against ABA don't have the research. There is a lack of empathy... When you think about the genetic nature of autism, it's not surprising that these people are not able to take somebody else's perspective and to try and understand why someone else is doing this ... they treat each other disrespectfully" ~Personal interview with Canadian advocate, February 2009!. It is worth emphasizing, however, that opponents of ABA, includ-

814 MICHAEL ORSINI
ing Canadian autism researcher Michelle Dawson's intervention before the Supreme Court of Canada, have raised significant points. While there has been some online debate about Dawson's role in influencing the Supreme Court's decision in Auton, her factum is clear in its sharp criticism of the ethical questions raised by such interventions:
None of the evidence about the efficacy or medical necessity of ABA dealt with the serious ethical issues that arise when powerful behaviour therapies are applied to clients who can't consent. Since scientists and societies have historically made significant errors in deciding which behaviours ~left-handedness, homosexuality! should be treated, and in which kinds of people they deem acceptable and valuable, behaviour therapies involving non-consenting clients require an ethical review process in order to decide which behaviours should be treated. This process should involve affected parties from the community, as well as experts in science, ethics, and the law. ~Dawson, 2004a!
In a landmark decision in 2004, the Supreme Court of Canada overturned two lower court judgments, ruling that the failure of the provincial government to cover the costs of this therapy did not constitute a violation of equality rights as defined in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, as had been claimed by the parents of four autistic children who launched the legal action. The victories in the lower courts, however, yielded some positive developments that have not been undone in the wake of the Supreme Court loss. BC residents can still apply for up to $20,000 of funding per child under the age of six for autism intervention, in addition to $6,000 per year for children aged 6 to 18 ~Tiedemann, 2008!. In addition, the existence of provincial services in BC has spurred advocates in other provinces to press for similar programs.
In addition to disputes over its cause and how to treat autism, "who" is doing the contesting in the autism field merits attention. Drawing on Brown and colleagues' work ~2004! on health social movements, in previous work, I distinguished autism activism from autistic activism ~Orsini, 2009!. In Canada, autism activism, which is associated with parent-led advocacy, grounds its claims in fair access to health care resources--one group is appropriately named Medicare for Autism Now!--and uses autism to attack the generosity of our universal health care system.7 Much attention has centred on parents struggling to cover the costs of behavioural interventions, which can cost as much as $60,000 per year. The issue was addressed in the Senate report on autism, Pay Now or Pay Later, which argued that failing to intervene now will impose significant societal costs later ~Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology, 2007!.
Canadian autism activists, largely the parents of autistic children, have been at pains to point out that Canada has yet to create a focused autism strategy such as that adopted by the US in 2006 with the passage

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

815

of the Combatting Autism Act, which committed more than $900 million to autism research spending over five years. Families for Early Autism Treatment of British Columbia, one of the lead plaintiffs in the Supreme Court case, called the Canadian government's refusal to pass a bill amending the Canada Health Act to include funding for autism treatment "an ostrich approach to crisis management" ~ FEAT of BC, 2007!. Advocates invoke the spectre of ballooning costs to support children who might need to be institutionalized to buttress their claim that governments are doing little to help cash-strapped families. Although parent activists are far from being a monolithic group, many organizations run by parents focus their advocacy on access to behavioural treatment or on promoting alternative or complementary treatments, some of which are more controversial than others. These include, among others, gluten- and casein-free diets, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, drama therapy and chelation, a controversial procedure that is used to remove toxins from the body.
In contrast to autism advocates, autistic activists decry the attention on treatment and focus instead on the human rights of autistic people, drawing specific attention to the underrepresentation of autistic individuals in mainstream autism advocacy organizations. Autistic activism is more in line with the notion of "embodied health movements," which are marked by three characteristics ~Brown et al., 2004!. First, they place the biological bodies of people living with the condition at the heart of their efforts. Second, they contest existing scientific or medical knowledge and practice. Third, movement actors often collaborate with scientists and other health professionals to raise the profile of the condition in question, whether advocating for increased funding for research or for prevention efforts. Autistic activists are not alone in this effort, however; autism activists also engage with and support research, one of the more notable being Autism Speaks, the largest US-based autism advocacy group. The key differences between the two relate to the intensity of contestation with expert knowledge and how the situated knowledge of people living with autism legitimizes their political involvement ~Chamak, 2008; Orsini and Smith, 2010!.
Finally, there are disputes over what role autistic people should play in politics generally. "Nothing about us without us," the rallying cry of the worldwide disability community, echoes throughout the movement of autistic self-advocates. How is it possible, some ask, for autism advocacy organizations to operate with little representation by actual autistic people? The challenge of representing cognitively disabled populations is not resolved, however, by a simple recourse to this organizing principle ~Davis, 2002; Pothier and Devlin, 2006; Shakespeare, 2006a!.
As is clear, the autism field is marked by deep disagreements about how it is defined, what causes it, what the most effective treatment is and whether autistic people should be treated at all. In the next section, I

816 MICHAEL ORSINI
elaborate the two main challenges autism poses for how we think about redistribution0recognition claims and the welfare state.
Autism's Challenges to the Welfare State
At the outset, I identified two main challenges to the welfare state raised by the case of autism. The first concerns challenges to a model of provision centred on redistribution and expansion of the universal basket of goods and services provided by the welfare state. Advocates who appeared before the Supreme Court of Canada, for example, contended that autism treatment constituted "medically necessary" care that should be covered according to the terms of the Canada Health Act, the federal legislation that partly governs how the federal government distributes funds to the provinces to cover health care costs ~Greschner and Lewis, 2003; Manfredi and Maioni, 2005!.
While Esping-Andersen's famous classification of welfare state regimes places Canada among a number of other liberal welfare states, he recognized that these three ideal types of welfare state regimes were not mutually exclusive ~Esping-Andersen, 1990!. The use of the term "regime" is meant to incorporate not only what the welfare state does but how it is structured, as well. In liberal welfare states, provision is limited to modest benefits for a clientele of low-income, usually workingclass, state dependents. In such regimes, the welfare system is strongly market oriented. Decommodification "occurs when a service is rendered as a matter of right, and when a person can maintain a livelihood without reliance on the market" ~Esping-Andersen, 1990: 21-22!.
Although the Senate report that details the financial toll autism takes on families does not frame its intervention in these terms, it is clear that the lack of state support for treatment or care effectively downloads those responsibilities onto families. Sabrina Freeman, a Canadian activist, reflecting on the Supreme Court loss, argued that, paradoxically, autistic children might fare better in the US than in Canada, despite the lack of a robust welfare state in the US:
In Canada we are cruel like socialists. We like to keep the disabled poor and, in fact, homeless. If she ~my autistic daughter! didn't have a parent like me, she'd be homeless, and out on the street, until the police would pick her up. And then they throw them into jail, and the hospital. It is so broken. There is no hope. I have nothing good to say about this country. I spent 10 years trying to make this country a better place. It is morally bankrupt. ~Personal interview with Sabrina Freeman, February 2009, Langley, British Columbia!
The second challenge, which is seemingly more difficult to resolve, concerns how the welfare state recognizes and valorizes autistic differ-

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

817

ence. While the idea of "neurodiversity" has a checkered history, it has become attached, for better or for worse, to debates about how autism challenges dominant or "normal" forms of cognitive being in the world ~Ortega, 2009!. Its companion term, "neurotypical," is used by autistic activists, sometimes with tongue planted firmly in cheek, to refer to nonautistic individuals.8 In his book Neurodiversity, which addressed autism as well as ADHD, Down syndrome and dyslexia, among others, Armstrong argues that we should be careful not to "romanticize mental illness" or to view it as a "sentimental ploy to help people with mental illness and their caregivers feel good about their condition" ~Armstrong, 2010: 25!. Rather, he says, we need to change the way we think about the diversity of brain wiring, recognizing that some of the deficiencies associated with autistic people, such as the tendency of ~some! autistic people to be systematizing versus empathizing, can be put to productive use once we recognize the benefits associated with an ability to better connect with objects rather than people.
Tyler Cowen, an economics professor who is also autistic, suggests that the qualities so derided in autistics are precisely the kinds of attributes we need to survive in today's turbulent economy. For instance, he notes, autistics "are information lovers to an extreme degree and they are the people who engage with information most passionately" ~Cowen, 2009: 2!. Self-professed "infovores," the autistic mind-set of ordering information, should be seen as "a path toward many of the best rewards in life and a path toward creating your own economy and taking control of your own education and entertainment" ~3!. Cowen's main point is that it is unethical to "use the hammer of science to brand a group of people as "inferior" as a "preordained social consensus" ~17!. Why, he asks, do we refrain from using damaging stereotypes when talking about racial difference or physical disabilities, but seem reluctant to do the same when talking about autism?
Activists associated with neurodiversity normally frame their claims in non-political terms, that is, they are not always interested in scoring policy victories or in making redistributive claims against the state. As Bumiller explains, however, the neurodiversity movement does reframe the social challenges faced by autistic citizens in political terms. "While for many autistics the social realm is explored reluctantly and viewed as treacherous territory where conventions, attachments, and mores present obstacles for self-expression, the impetus to engage in the public realm ... is then perhaps motivated by a desire to create the conditions where they have greater freedom to express their individuality" ~2008: 980!.
Neurodiversity proponents "assert that any erosion of an autistic person's right to be treated as fully human strikes against the core conditions of freedom in a pluralistic society" ~981!. For instance, at a retreat organized for autistic people in Pennsylvania that I was able to attend,

818 MICHAEL ORSINI
many of the attendees were explicitly encouraged to engage in whatever behaviours they found most comforting. This was meant to send a strong message to proponents of standard autism treatment, which involves patients being rewarded for unlearning these self-stimulating behaviours. Forcing children to abandon these repetitive behaviours, neurodiversity advocates argue, says more about "neurotypical" members of society and their unease with difference than it does about the purportedly "self-destructive" nature of stimming. Advocates of a "social model of disability" argue that more attention should be spent getting nondisabled people to accommodate the needs of cognitively different citizens. As the creator of the website neurodiversity.com suggests: "The insistence that autistic citizens must modify harmless idiosyncrasies for the comfort of others is unreasonable and oppressive. Such idiosyncrasies often serve a productive purpose for the autistic person. Placing the burden of adaptation on autistic citizens only serves the purpose of enabling others to avoid the discomfort of confronting their own fears, their vulnerability and their destructive attitudes towards difference" ~Kathleen Seidel, quoted in Bumiller, 2008: 981!.
In some activist circles, the claim to autistic difference is framed in cultural terms. Like deaf activists before them who have accused the hearing parents of deaf children of depriving their children of opportunities to participate in deaf culture, some autistic self-advocates view attempts to limit autistic behaviour as an attack on autistic cultural expression. Is there such a thing as an autistic culture? While there are some similarities between the two cases, a noticeable difference between the two concerns the affinity between deaf cultures and other minority linguistic communities. The model of deaf culture advocated by some members of the deaf community fits a liberal framework of diversity in which a common shared language operates as a defining attribute of that community.9 As Sparrow explains, deafness is socially constructed as outside of the norm, even though how we determine what is normal is in a state of flux.
Deafness is a disability because hearing is one of the six senses that humans characteristically possess... But a moment's thought reveals how questionbegging any such attempt must be... If we include the deaf, then hearing will not be something that all normal people have. It will instead become a less important mark of difference, like hair or eye colour, and our account of what it is to be normal will not mention it... What this suggests is that the route whereby we decide on the nature of normal bodies actually runs the other way. Normal bodies are those that normal people possess and it is our intuitions about who is normal that are doing all the work here. ~2005: 138-39!
Some autistic people make similar claims with regard to their difficulties with social interaction, empathy or their preference for objects rather

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

819

than people. These traits are viewed as deficiencies by mainstream society because we construct certain forms of engagement as normal and, therefore, fundamental to personhood. But what if we viewed some of these behaviours as part of the "cognitive profile" of autistics, rather than as a deviation from normal, socially regulated modes of interaction? Indeed, one autistic self-advocate associated with the neurodiversity movement was clear: "We want to allow people to speak for themselves and to get over the roadblock of being `normal.' There is this idea that autism is a tragedy worse than death, that real autistic people have a horrible quality of life. We need to send a message that being autistic is not a negative state of being" ~Personal interview, Pennsylvania, June 2008!.
In the deaf community, the issue is particularly contentious because the very existence of a minority language rests on the ability of community members to encourage others to learn and pass on that minority language. Referring to the debates surrounding the use of cochlear implants for deaf children, Sparrow suggests that members of the deaf community are justified in fearing that implants might threaten the survival of sign language. "It is perfectly possible to lead a happy and productive life without hearing or spoken language. A sizeable proportion of deaf individuals say that they would not want to be granted hearing even if it were possible ... In the face of such evidence and testimony from those who experience deafness, it is problematic for hearing persons to continue to insist that it constitutes a disability to be avoided if at all possible" ~2005: 137!. While there are some areas of overlap between the deaf and autistic communities, especially with regard to fears of "cultural genocide" and the complicated role of parents who do not share a child's disability but are in positions of decision-making authority with regard to their children's welfare, one should be careful in comparing the claims to cultural difference expressed in the deaf community to those articulated by autistic individuals.

Autistic Citizenship and Welfare State Transformation
The experience of disability in Canada is partly structured by the ways in which states construct the reciprocal arrangements and ties that bind disabled citizens to non-disabled citizens. What do able-bodied people owe to the disabled? How do we grapple with a concept as slippery and elusive as disability, especially when there are important differences in how disability is experienced depending upon the nature of that disability ~for instance, physical, intellectual, genetic!?
Somers links a rediscovery in the notion of citizenship, and particularly social citizenship, however short-lived, to the reawakening of the power and potential of civil society actors. The experiences of many social

820 MICHAEL ORSINI
movements in countries far and wide reveal that civil society can be a site bursting with democratic potential. As she reminds us, social citizenship for Marshall was not focused solely on entitlements ~programs or services delivered by the welfare state! but rather, as a "matter of social recognition and full inclusion in the body politic" ~2008: 24!. Jenson and Phillips ~1996! coined the term "citizenship regime" as a way to provide a conceptual bridge between welfare state restructuring and its impact on how citizenship ~and membership! in the polity was being reframed. As they note, citizenship matters because it reveals the boundaries of the political, who is in and who is out. It provides us with an opportunity to ask important questions about inclusion0exclusion, which type of citizen is being favoured ~the "responsible," unencumbered citizen versus the citizen who is embedded in a network of civil society organizations seeking access to and representation in the state. Jenson and Phillips were worried, quite rightly, about a regime shift away from a recognition of the value of civil society, toward a view of civil society-state interaction that privileges highly individualistic forms of involvement with citizens acting as atomized, dispassionate observers. We can ask similar questions about how cognitive disabilities permit us to imagine an autistic citizen who is more than a "financial drain" on the welfare state, as she or he is currently framed in mainstream autism advocacy. Within the self-advocacy community, activists view their inclusion in research as part of a broader inclusion in society. As one autistic self-advocate who engages in research explained, "The whole self-advocacy movement exists so that autistic adults can actually shape research that improves their lives" ~Personal interview, Oregon, March 2009!. Her collaborator, an academic researcher and advocate, compared advocacy with autistic people to her work with other disadvantaged groups. "I am a parent of an autistic child and in my professional life, I do health disparities research. I began to realize that I could change `black' for `autistic' and `white' for neurotypical and it was the same kind of conversation. We are talking about another group that has been marginalized" ~Personal interview, Oregon, March 2009!.
Following T.H. Marshall's classic work, I am interested here in thinking through how social citizenship practices might be enacted among neurodiverse communities. Commenting on the US intellectual disability movement, Allison Carey explains that self-advocacy is far from perfect, but it is a necessary precondition for the democratic involvement of disabled citizens in decision-making processes that ultimately affect them. At the same time, however, self-advocacy movements are "uncomfortably silent" on the question of how to deal with individuals with intellectual disabilities who are not interested in engaging in political action, by reason of choice or the sheer inability to do so because of a particular impairment ~2009: 223!. The disability movement must be accommodating enough to accept that not all individuals may wish to express them-

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

821

selves in these ways. After all, as Baker explains in her recent work on neurodiversity, individuals should have the right "to choose not to publicly identify as having a neurological difference" ~2011: 21!.
Given the complex processes that underpin identity construction, an inclusive conception of neurodiversity should protect "the preferences of those who do not consider their neurological identity as a core element of personal identity while still identifying with neurodiverse communities... Someone with a neurological difference has the same right as any other person to create an identity more centred on personal characteristics than on neurological differences" ~21!.
Theorists of citizenship and identity politics might also pay closer attention to how the previous markers and drivers of identity are being refashioned as individuals engage in a more profound way with the neurosciences and link conceptions of their identities and personhood to aspects of their biology, in this case their brains. Ortega discusses neurodiversity in the context of the emergence of the "cerebral subject," a term he uses to "describe brain-centred approaches to the human person and to understand the use of cerebral vocabulary within the neurodiversity movement" ~2009: 426!. The emergence of autistic cultures in which individuals insist that they are differently wired neurologically, he argues, is linked to the penetration of neuroscience and to neuroscientific ways of knowing in our everyday lives. As he explains, "Neuroscientific theories, practices, technologies and therapies are influencing the ways we think about ourselves and relate to others, favouring forms of neurological or cerebral subjectivation" ~426!. On the question of autistic self-determination, one US-based autistic advocate was clear. "We are born to a different culture. We need culture to be. Autistic culture is a must for us--for survival" ~Personal interview with US-based advocate, June 2008, emphasis added!. Rabinow ~1996! has used the term "biosociality" to capture how new subjectivities are formed when individuals come together as a result of a shared biology. The link between these new subjectivities and current debates about the welfare state relates to the citizenship duties and obligations that become attached to these claims. Rose and Novas ~2005! explain how emergent forms of "biological citizenship" compel us to ask different questions about the attachments between states and citizens and about citizenship itself ~see Orsini, 2009!. No longer dictated from above, citizenship resides in collectivities that have organized around shared features of their biological identities. The individuals who make claims against the state possess highly specialized information about their specific condition and speak from a position of embodied authority as individuals who have firsthand knowledge of what it is like to live with their condition.
We have yet to resolve how to involve non-disabled representatives of disabled citizens in decision making in ways that account for their own distinctive perspectives, be they grounded in their experiential knowl-

822 MICHAEL ORSINI
edge as parents or as advocates. For some autistic self-advocates, the message is simple. "It is one of my fundamental beliefs that if you act on behalf of a population, you have an obligation to defer to the leadership of the people who are directly affected in any community. You should not set policy about the African-American community or gay community without consulting them. Same for the autistic and disability community. We need to take self advocacy into our own hands" ~Personal interview with US-based advocate, June 2008!. While the interventions of parents on behalf of their loved ones are vital, there remain problems with regard to the authenticity of their claims, especially when they might involve young children who have little or no agency.
Finally, apart from the importance of communicating the value of disabled lives and enhancing their citizenship capacities, what can states do in the day to day to assist disabled people? Wolff identified at least four types of policy responses: compensation, personal enhancement, targeted personal enhancement and status enhancement. The first involves "providing disabled people with cash, or goods in kind ... to make up for the disadvantage of disability." Personal enhancement refers to "steps to improve the internal resources of the disabled person, whether through surgery, medicine, education or training." "Targeted resource enhancement" provides money or other goods, "but with some sort of strings attached." Finally, "status enhancement" implies changes in "the social, material, or cultural structure so that individuals are able to do more with the resources they have, rather than provide them with extra resources of some kind" ~Wolff, 2010: 151!. Advocates of the "social model of disability" are most likely to favour status enhancement as a response to disability. "Changing the world rather than the person is a way of accepting individuals in their differences, rather than making them adapt to the world" ~151!. As one autistic activist explained: "We are concerned about a social structure that says there is only one way to relate to it" ~Personal interview with US-based autistic advocate, June 2008!.
Conclusion
I have laid out two of the fundamental challenges autistic citizens pose to our understanding of the welfare state in the age of diversity. I used the term "citizen" deliberately to undergird my claim that autistic people are people first, rather than passive participants in society who are relegated to perform "sick" roles in order to be deemed morally deserving of state and0or societal support. We should resist the tendency to frame autism solely as a condition requiring intensive corrective intervention. In addition, we need to recognize, as well, that not all autistic individuals, children and adults included, wish to be included in the neurodiver-

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

823

sity tent. Autistic people may choose to base their identity in terms that are unrelated to their autism diagnosis. It would be fundamentally antidemocratic to impose an identity on all autistic people and require them to perform this role in public settings in order to shore up state support for autism. Some parents of autistic children reject the idea of neurodiversity because they fear it will trivialize what they view as significant differences between their children and other autistic people whom they view as high functioning, despite the rejection by some of distinctions between high- and low-functioning forms of autism.
The case of autism challenges us to consider how the needs, aspirations, and political claims of autistic citizens ~not to mention non-autistic citizens who form part of the broader autism advocacy community! might be incorporated in a newly configured citizenship regime. While the concerns of parents of autistic children have been debated in the media and in the courts, less attention has been paid to the challenges posed by the argument that the state should support forms of "deep" neurodiversity, which include but are not limited to the recognition of autistic ways of being in the world. Autism is as much about the remaking of the welfare state to accommodate disabled citizens, some of whom require assistance in their daily lives, while others might require forms of accommodation that complement, rather than replace, their status as full persons. Personhood, then, is not something autistic people should have to seek or demand as a form of charity from the state. Promoting the welfare of autistic citizens, then, demands a full appreciation for the diversity of "autistic presence" in the world ~Murray, 2012!.

Notes
1 I use the term "autistic person" rather than "person with autism" to denote that autism is a fundamental aspect of personhood, not simply an illness identity imposed from above. Autistic self-advocates, such as Jim Sinclair argue, quite convincingly, that you cannot separate autism from the person in the same way that you might distinguish a virus from a person ~Sinclair, 1999!. Some autism advocates strongly disagree with this perspective, however, insisting on person-first terminology.
2 Shakespeare ~2006b! is a vocal critic of the "mythical dichotomy" between the social and medical models of disability. He argues that it is possible to adopt a progressive view of disability without recourse to the favoured social model. As Pothier and Devlin explain, citing the work of Tremain, some disability activists oppose the social model because it juxtaposes impairment with disability, with impairment still conceived as a "natural defect" and disability seen "as society's oppressive characterization of an impairment" ~Pothier and Devlin, 2006: 6-7!.
3 Interviews were conducted, mainly in person, between 2008 and 2010 and included a series of semi-structured questions related to autism advocacy. Participants were asked about their involvement in advocacy, and, if they were autistic, how their autism diagnosis had affected their experience advocating in the autism field. In the case of the Autreat meeting mentioned above, apart from obtaining ethical clearance from the University of Ottawa, I applied for and obtained permission from meeting orga-

824 MICHAEL ORSINI
nizers to attend the week-long Autreat meeting in Bradford, Pennsylvania, with the understanding that I was not permitted to approach anyone for an interview unless he or she had signed a sheet indicating their interest in participating following a brief presentation I made about the research to all participants. This was intended to ensure that individuals who might be uncomfortable interacting with others, especially with non-autistic persons such as me, could have their privacy respected. As such, snowball sampling was not permitted. Interviews that were conducted with individuals outside of this week-long retreat did draw occasionally on snowball-sampling techniques, as well as background research to identify key organizations in the autism advocacy world. The interviews, which were all recorded and transcribed, were read closely and analyzed by drawing on common themes that emerged. 4 For instance, autistic self-advocate Amanda Baggs is non-verbal and uses computerassisted technology to communicate. While she identifies herself as "low-functioning," her interventions, including a popular You Tube video titled In My Language, are widely cited. The attention she has received has provoked a backlash, however, with some online advocates questioning the legitimacy of her autism diagnosis. 5 We can add to this the policy challenge of dealing with Canadians who live with "episodic disabilities," temporary impairments that limit their ability to live healthy, productive lives. They are "neither always well nor always sick" ~Lightman et al., 2009!. 6 My thanks to one of the journal's anonymous reviewers for noting that I glaringly omitted to discuss the effect on autism prevalence of the widening criteria for autism diagnosis, as well as the significance of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, which acknowledges "that every human being can experience a decrement in health and thereby experience some degree of disability" ~http:00 www.who.int0classifications0icf0en0!. In this new definition, disability is less an anomaly than a way of life for many people at some point in their lives. 7 The organization recently prepared a film, Medicare's Orphans, to dramatize their perspective. Released in September 2011, the film is available online: http:00www. medicareforautismnow.org0the-film0medicares-orphans0 8 At the Autreat meeting, one of the most popular panels is titled, "Ask a Neurotypical." The panel communicates to non-autistic people that they might appear to be just as strange or alien to autistics as vice-versa. Ian Hacking ~2009! has taken up the alien metaphor to describe interactions between autistic and non-autistic people. 9 Dhamoon points out, however, that despite some of these similarities, Kymlicka does not think the deaf community meets the test of qualifying as a national linguistic minority community ~2007: 26-27!. See also Lee's ~2006! discussion of Kymlicka's work as it relates to disability.
References
Abu-Laban, Yasmeen and Christina Gabriel. 2002. Selling Diversity: Immigration, Multiculturalism, Employment Equity and Globalization. Peterborough: Broadview Press.
Armstrong, Thomas. 2010. Neurodiversity: Discovering the Extraordinary Gifts of Autism, ADHD, Dyslexia and Other Brain Differences. Cambridge MA: Da Capo Press.
Arneil, Barbara. 2009. "Disability, Self Image, and Modern Political Theory." Political Theory 37 ~2!: 218-42.
Autistic Self Advocacy Network. Website. "An Urgent Call to Action: Tell NYU Child Study Center to Abandon Stereotypes Against People with Disabilities," Dec. 7, 2007. http:00www.autisticadvocacy.org0modules0smartsection0item.php?itemid21 ~accessed Jan. 13, 2012!.

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

825

Baker, Dana Lee. 2011. The Politics of Neurodiversity: Why Public Policy Matters. Boulder CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Banting, Keith, Richard Johnston, Will Kymlicka and Stuart Soroka. 2006. "Do Multiculturalism Policies Erode the Welfare State? An Empirical Analysis." In Multicultural-
ism and the Welfare State: Recognition and Redistribution in Contemporary Democracies, ed. Keith Banting and Will Kymlicka. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Banting, Keith. 2010. "Is There a Progressive's Dilemma in Canada? Immigration, Multiculturalism and the Welfare State." Presidential Address to the Canadian Political Science Association. Canadian Journal of Political Science 43 ~4!: 797-820. Banting, Keith and Will Kymlicka. 2006. Multiculturalism and the Welfare State: Recognition and Redistribution in Contemporary Democracies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Baron-Cohen, Simon. 1997. Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. Brown, Phil, Stephen Zavestoski, Sabrina McCormick, Brian Mayer, Rachel Morello-Frosch, and Rebecca Gasior Altman. 2004. "Embodied Health Movements: New Approaches to Social Movements in Health." Sociology of Health and Illness 26 ~1!: 50-80. Bumiller, Kristin. 2008. "Quirky Citizens: Autism, Gender and Reimagining Disability." Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 33 ~4!: 967-91. Carey, Allison C. 2009. On the Margins of Citizenship: Intellectual Disability and Civil Rights in Twentieth-Century America. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2012. "Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders--Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 14 sites, United States, 2008." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 61 ~31!: 1-19. Chamak, Brigitte. 2008. "Autism and Social Movements: French Parents' Associations and International Autistic Individuals' Organizations." Sociology of Health and Illness 30 ~1!: 76-96. Cowen, Tyler. 2009. Create Your Own Economy: The Path to Prosperity in a Disordered World. New York: Dutton. Davidson, Joyce and Victoria L. Henderson. 2010. "`Coming out' on the spectrum: autism, identity and disclosure." Social & Cultural Geography 11 ~2!: 155-70. Davis, Lennard J. 2002. Bending over Backwards: Disability, Dismodernism and Other Difficult Positions. New York and London: New York University Press. Dawson, Michelle. 2004a. "An Autistic at the Supreme Court, The Auton Case: The Intervener's Factum." http:00www.sentex.net0%7Enexus230naa_fac.html ~Jan. 13, 2012!. Dawson, Michelle. 2004b. "The Many Varieties of Being Written Off: An Argument about Autism as Catastrophe." http:00www.sentex.net0;nexus230naa_wro.html ~Jan 13, 2012!. Dhamoon, Rita. 2009. Identity/difference politics: How difference is produced, and why it matters. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. Eisenberg, Avigail, ed. 2006. Diversity and Equality: The Changing Framework of Freedom in Canada. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. Esping-Andersen, Gosta. 1990. "Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism." In The Welfare State Reader, ed. Christopher Pierson and Francis Castles. Malden MA: Polity Press. Esping-Andersen, Gosta ~with Duncan Gallie, Anton Hemerijck and John Myles!. 2002. Why We Need a Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Eyal, Gil, Brendan Hart, Emine Onculer, Nita Oren and Natasha Rossi. 2010. The Autism Matrix: The Social Origins of the Autism Epidemic. Cambridge: Polity Press. Families for Early Autism Treatment of British Columbia. 2007. "Ottawa's Ongoing Refusal to Provide Autism Health Care," Media release, Feb. 26. Frank, Arthur W. 2002. "Why Study People's Stories? The Dialogical Ethics of Narrative Analysis." International Journal of Qualitative Methods 1~1!: 109-17.

826 MICHAEL ORSINI
Ghaziuddin, Mohammad. 2010. Brief Report: Should the DSM V Drop Asperger Syndrome? Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 40: 1146-48.
Government of Canada. 2010. Federal Disability Report: The Government of Canada's Annual Report on Disability. Ottawa: Human Resources and Skills Development Canada. Cat. No HS61-102010.
Greschner, Donna and Steven Lewis. 2003. "Auton and Evidence-Based Decision-Making: Medicare in the Courts." Canadian Bar Review 82: 501-35.
Grinker, Roy Richard. 2010. "Disorder out of Chaos," New York Times, February 10, op. ed. Hacking, Ian. 2009. "Humans, aliens & autism." Daedalus Summer: 44-59. Hankivsky, Olena. 2004. Social Policy and the Ethic of Care. Vancouver: University of
British Columbia Press. Harell, Allison and Dietlind Stolle. 2010. "Diversity and Democratic Politics: An Intro-
duction." Canadian Journal of Political Science 43 ~2!: 235-56. Jaarsma, Pier and Stellan Welin. 2011. "Autism as a Natural Human Variation: Reflec-
tions on the Claims of the Neurodiversity Movement." Health Care Analysis ~ February!: 1-16. Jenson, Jane. 1989. "`Different' but not `Exceptional': Canada's Permeable Fordism." Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 26~1!: 69-94 Jenson, Jane and Martin Papillon. 2000. Backgrounder: Citizenship and the Recognition of Cultural Diversity: The Canadian Experience. Ottawa: Canadian Policy Research Networks. Jenson, Jane and Susan D. Phillips. 1996. "Regime Shift: New Citizenship Practices in Canada." International Journal of Canadian Studies 14 ~ Fall!: 111-136. Jenson, Jane and Denis Saint-Martin. 2003. "New Routes to Social Cohesion? Citizenship and the Social Investment State." Canadian Journal of Sociology 28 ~1!: 77-99. Kershaw, Paul. 2005. Carefair: Rethinking the Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. Kershaw, Paul. 2008. "Social Care." In Recasting the Social in Citizenship, ed. Engin Isin. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Kittay, Eva. F. and Licia Carlson, eds. 2010. Cognitive Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy. London: Wiley-Blackwell. Kymlicka, Will. 2007. Multicultural Odysseys: Navigating the New International Politics of Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Lee, Theresa Man King. 2006. "Multicultural Citizenship: The Case of the Disabled." In Critical Disability Theory: Essays in Philosophy, Politics, Policy and Law, ed. Richard Devlin and Dianne Pothier. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. Lightman, Ernie, Andrea Vick, Dean Herd and Andrew Mitchell. 2009. "Not Disabled Enough: Episodic Disabilities and the Ontario Disability Support Program." Disability Studies Quarterly 29 ~3! 1-16. Linton, Simi. 2007. My Body Politics: A Memoir. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. Manfredi, Chris and Antonia Maioni. 2005. "Litigating Innovation: Health Care Policy and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms." Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Canadian Political Science Association, London, Ontario. Marshall, T.H. 1950. Citizenship and Social Class, and Other Essays. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Murray, Stuart. 2012. Autism. London and New York: Routledge. Novas, Carlos. 2006. "The Political Economy of Hope: Patients' Organizations, Science and Biovalue." BioSocieties 1: 289-305. Orsini, Michael. 2009. "Contesting the Autistic Subject: Biological Citizenship and the Autism0Autistic Movement." In Critical Interventions in the Ethics of Health Care, ed. Stuart Murray and Dave Holmes. London: Ashgate.

Autism, Neurodiversity and the Welfare State

827

Orsini, Michael and Miriam Smith. 2010. "Social Movements, Knowledge and Public Policy: The Case of Autism Activism in Canada and the US." Critical Policy Studies 4 ~1!: 38-57.
Ortega, Francisco. 2009. "The Cerebral Subject and the Challenge of Neurodiversity." BioSocieties 4: 425-45.
Pothier, Dianne and Richard Devlin. 2006. "Introduction: Toward a Critical Theory of Dis-Citizenship." In Critical Disability Theory: Essays in Philosophy, Politics, Policy, and Law, ed. Dianne Pothier and Richard Devlin. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Prince, Michael J. 2009. Absent Citizens: Disability Politics and Policy in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Rabinow, Paul. 1996. Essays on the anthropology of reason. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rose, Nikolas. 2006. The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power, and Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rose, Nikolas and Carlos Novas. 2005. "Biological citizenship." In Global assemblages: Technology, politics and ethics as anthropological problems, ed. Aihwa Ong and Stephen J. Collier. London: Blackwell.
Shakespeare, Tom. 2006a. Disability Rights and Wrongs. New York and London: Routledge. Shakespeare, Tom. 2006b. "The Social Model of Disability." In The Disability Studies
Reader, ed. Lennard J. Davis. 2nd ed. New York and London: Routledge. Silverman, Chloe. 2012. Understanding Autism: Parents, Doctors, and the History of a
Disorder. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. Sinclair, Jim. 1999. "Why I dislike person-first language." http:00autismmythbusters.com0
general-public0autistic-vs-people-with-autism0jimsinclair-why-i-dislike-person-firstlanguage0 Smith, Miriam. 2009. "Diversity and Canadian Political Development." Presidential Address to the Canadian Political Science Association. Canadian Journal of Political Science 42 ~4!: 831-54. Somers, Margaret. 2008. Genealogies of Citizenship: Markets, Statelessness and the Right to Have Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sparrow, Robert. 2005. "Defending Deaf Culture: The Case of Cochlear Implants." The Journal of Political Philosophy 13 ~2!: 135-52. Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology. 2003. First Meeting on Mental Health and Mental Illness, Proceedings, issue 9, February 26. Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology. 2007. Pay Now or Pay Later: Autism Families in Crisis, Final Report, March. Statistics Canada. 2007. Participation and Activity Limitation Survey 2006: Tables. Ottawa: Statistics Canada ~Cat. No. 89-628-XIE - No. 003!. Tiedemann, Marlisa. 2008. Health Care at the Supreme Court of Canada: Auton (Guardian Ad Litem of) v. British Columbia (Attorney General). Ottawa: Parliamentary Information and Research Service. Valentine, Fraser and Jill Vickers. 1996. "Released from the Yoke of Paternalism and Charity: Citizenship and the Rights of Canadians with Disabilities." International Journal of Canadian Studies 14 ~fall!: 155-77. Wikler, Daniel. 2010. "Cognitive Disability, Paternalism and the Global Burden of Disease." In Cognitive Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy, ed. Eva. F. Kittay and Licia Carlson. London: Wiley-Blackwell. Wolff, Jonathan. 2010. "Cognitive Disability in a Society of Equals." In Cognitive Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy, ed. Eva F. Kittay and Licia Carlson. London: Wiley-Blackwell.

